PROVENANCE: Supplied by Kevin 2026-08-20 (exchange/'MCL - Section 15.234 - Michigan Legislature.pdf', text-extracted).
SOURCE: legislature.mi.gov official MCL page, § 15.234 complete (FOIA § 4, all 14 subsections); site banner 'Complete Through PA 91 of 2026'; history ends Am. 2020, Act 38.
NOTE: Official current text; treat as openable-source equivalent for the MI gap pass. Abandonment rule in subsec. (14) corresponds to existing library rule MI-0059.
----------------------------------------------------------------
8/20/26, 11:57 AM

MCL - Section 15.234 - Michigan Legislature

Michigan Legislature
Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Senate adjourned until Wednesday, August 26, 2026 10:00 AM
House adjourned until Tuesday, August 25, 2026 1:30 PM

Home

Legislature

Laws

Sign Up

More

Log In

MCL - Section 15.234
Download Section
Chapter 15
Act 442 of 1976
Previous Section

Next Section

FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT (EXCERPT)
Act 442 of 1976
15.234 Fee; limitation on total fee; labor costs; establishment of
procedures and guidelines; creation of written public summary;
detailed itemization; availability of information on website;
notification to requestor; deposit; failure to respond in timely
manner; increased estimated fee deposit; deposit as fee; failure to
pay or appeal deposit; request abandoned.
Sec. 4.
(1) A public body may charge a fee for a public record search, for the necessary
copying of a public record for inspection, or for providing a copy of a public record if
it has established, makes publicly available, and follows procedures and guidelines
to implement this section as described in subsection (4). Subject to subsections (2),
(3), (4), (5), and (9), the fee must be limited to actual mailing costs, and to the
actual incremental cost of duplication or publication including labor, the cost of
search, examination, review, and the deletion and separation of exempt from
nonexempt information as provided in section 14. Except as otherwise provided in
this act, if the public body estimates or charges a fee in accordance with this act,
the total fee must not exceed the sum of the following components:
(a) That portion of labor costs directly associated with the necessary searching
for, locating, and examining of public records in conjunction with receiving and
fulfilling a granted written request. The public body shall not charge more than the
hourly wage of its lowest-paid employee capable of searching for, locating, and
examining the public records in the particular instance regardless of whether that
person is available or who actually performs the labor. Labor costs under this
subdivision shall be estimated and charged in increments of 15 minutes or more,
with all partial time increments rounded down.
https://legislature.mi.gov/Laws/MCL?objectName=mcl-15-234

1/7

8/20/26, 11:57 AM

MCL - Section 15.234 - Michigan Legislature

(b) That portion of labor costs, including necessary review, if any, directly
associated with the separating and deleting of exempt information from nonexempt
information as provided in section 14. For services performed by an employee of
the public body, the public body shall not charge more than the hourly wage of its
lowest-paid employee capable of separating and deleting exempt information from
nonexempt information in the particular instance as provided in section 14,
regardless of whether that person is available or who actually performs the labor. If
a public body does not employ a person capable of separating and deleting exempt
information from nonexempt information in the particular instance as provided in
section 14 as determined by the public body's FOIA coordinator on a case-by-case
basis, it may treat necessary contracted labor costs used for the separating and
deleting of exempt information from nonexempt information in the same manner as
employee labor costs when calculating charges under this subdivision if it clearly
notes the name of the contracted person or firm on the detailed itemization
described under subsection (4). Total labor costs calculated under this subdivision
for contracted labor costs must not exceed an amount equal to 6 times the state
minimum hourly wage rate determined under section 4 of the improved workforce
opportunity wage act, 2018 PA 337, MCL 408.934. Labor costs under this
subdivision shall be estimated and charged in increments of 15 minutes or more,
with all partial time increments rounded down. A public body shall not charge for
labor directly associated with redaction under section 14 if it knows or has reason to
know that it previously redacted the public record in question and the redacted
version is still in the public body's possession.
(c) For public records provided to the requestor on any form of nonpaper physical
media, the actual and most reasonably economical cost of the nonpaper physical
media. The requestor may stipulate that the public records be provided on
nonpaper physical media, electronically mailed, or otherwise electronically provided
to him or her in lieu of paper copies. This subdivision does not apply if a public body
lacks the technological capability necessary to provide records on the particular
nonpaper physical media stipulated in the particular instance.
(d) For paper copies of public records provided to the requestor, the actual total
incremental cost of necessary duplication or publication, not including labor. The
cost of paper copies shall be calculated as a total cost per sheet of paper and shall
be itemized and noted in a manner that expresses both the cost per sheet and the
number of sheets provided. The fee must not exceed 10 cents per sheet of paper
for copies of public records made on 8-1/2- by 11-inch paper or 8-1/2- by 14-inch
paper. A public body shall utilize the most economical means available for making
copies of public records, including using double-sided printing, if cost saving and
available.
(e) The cost of labor directly associated with duplication or publication, including
making paper copies, making digital copies, or transferring digital public records to
be given to the requestor on nonpaper physical media or through the internet or
other electronic means as stipulated by the requestor. The public body shall not
charge more than the hourly wage of its lowest-paid employee capable of
necessary duplication or publication in the particular instance, regardless of
whether that person is available or who actually performs the labor. Labor costs
under this subdivision may be estimated and charged in time increments of the
public body's choosing; however, all partial time increments shall be rounded down.
https://legislature.mi.gov/Laws/MCL?objectName=mcl-15-234

2/7

8/20/26, 11:57 AM

MCL - Section 15.234 - Michigan Legislature

(f) The actual cost of mailing, if any, for sending the public records in a
reasonably economical and justifiable manner. The public body shall not charge
more for expedited shipping or insurance unless specifically stipulated by the
requestor, but may otherwise charge for the least expensive form of postal delivery
confirmation when mailing public records.
(2) When calculating labor costs under subsection (1)(a), (b), or (e), fee
components shall be itemized in a manner that expresses both the hourly wage and
the number of hours charged. The public body may also add up to 50% to the
applicable labor charge amount to cover or partially cover the cost of fringe benefits
if it clearly notes the percentage multiplier used to account for benefits in the
detailed itemization described in subsection (4). Subject to the 50% limitation, the
public body shall not charge more than the actual cost of fringe benefits, and
overtime wages shall not be used in calculating the cost of fringe benefits. Overtime
wages shall not be included in the calculation of labor costs unless overtime is
specifically stipulated by the requestor and clearly noted on the detailed itemization
described in subsection (4). A search for a public record may be conducted or
copies of public records may be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge if
the public body determines that a waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public
interest because searching for or furnishing copies of the public record can be
considered as primarily benefiting the general public. A public record search shall
be made and a copy of a public record shall be furnished without charge for the first
$20.00 of the fee for each request by either of the following:
(a) An individual who is entitled to information under this act and who submits an
affidavit stating that the individual is indigent and receiving specific public
assistance or, if not receiving public assistance, stating facts showing inability to
pay the cost because of indigency. If the requestor is eligible for a requested
discount, the public body shall fully note the discount on the detailed itemization
described under subsection (4). If a requestor is ineligible for the discount, the
public body shall inform the requestor specifically of the reason for ineligibility in the
public body's written response. An individual is ineligible for this fee reduction if any
of the following apply:
(i) The individual has previously received discounted copies of public records
under this subsection from the same public body twice during that calendar year.
(ii) The individual requests the information in conjunction with outside parties who
are offering or providing payment or other remuneration to the individual to make
the request. A public body may require a statement by the requestor in the affidavit
that the request is not being made in conjunction with outside parties in exchange
for payment or other remuneration.
(b) A nonprofit organization formally designated by the state to carry out activities
under subtitle C of the developmental disabilities assistance and bill of rights act of
2000, Public Law 106-402, and the protection and advocacy for individuals with
mental illness act, Public Law 99-319, or their successors, if the request meets all
of the following requirements:
(i) Is made directly on behalf of the organization or its clients.
(ii) Is made for a reason wholly consistent with the mission and provisions of
those laws under section 931 of the mental health code, 1974 PA 258, MCL
330.1931.
(iii) Is accompanied by documentation of its designation by the state, if requested
by the public body.
https://legislature.mi.gov/Laws/MCL?objectName=mcl-15-234

3/7

8/20/26, 11:57 AM

MCL - Section 15.234 - Michigan Legislature

(3) A fee as described in subsection (1) shall not be charged for the cost of
search, examination, review, and the deletion and separation of exempt from
nonexempt information as provided in section 14 unless failure to charge a fee
would result in unreasonably high costs to the public body because of the nature of
the request in the particular instance, and the public body specifically identifies the
nature of these unreasonably high costs.
(4) A public body shall establish procedures and guidelines to implement this act
and shall create a written public summary of the specific procedures and guidelines
relevant to the general public regarding how to submit written requests to the public
body and explaining how to understand a public body's written responses, deposit
requirements, fee calculations, and avenues for challenge and appeal. The written
public summary shall be written in a manner so as to be easily understood by the
general public. If the public body directly or indirectly administers or maintains an
official internet presence, it shall post and maintain the procedures and guidelines
and its written public summary on its website. A public body shall make the
procedures and guidelines publicly available by providing free copies of the
procedures and guidelines and its written public summary both in the public body's
response to a written request and upon request by visitors at the public body's
office. A public body that posts and maintains procedures and guidelines and its
written public summary on its website may include the website link to the
documents in lieu of providing paper copies in its response to a written request. A
public body's procedures and guidelines must include the use of a standard form for
detailed itemization of any fee amount in its responses to written requests under
this act. The detailed itemization must clearly list and explain the allowable charges
for each of the 6 fee components listed under subsection (1) that compose the total
fee used for estimating or charging purposes. Other public bodies may use a form
created by the department of technology, management, and budget or create a
form of their own that complies with this subsection. A public body that has not
established procedures and guidelines, has not created a written public summary,
or has not made those items publicly available without charge as required in this
subsection is not relieved of its duty to comply with any requirement of this act and
shall not require deposits or charge fees otherwise permitted under this act until it is
in compliance with this subsection. Notwithstanding this subsection and despite any
law to the contrary, a public body's procedures and guidelines under this act are not
exempt public records under section 13.
(5) If the public body directly or indirectly administers or maintains an official
internet presence, any public records available to the general public on that internet
site at the time the request is made are exempt from any charges under subsection
(1)(b). If the FOIA coordinator knows or has reason to know that all or a portion of
the requested information is available on its website, the public body shall notify the
requestor in its written response that all or a portion of the requested information is
available on its website. The written response, to the degree practicable in the
specific instance, must include a specific webpage address where the requested
information is available. On the detailed itemization described in subsection (4), the
public body shall separate the requested public records that are available on its
website from those that are not available on the website and shall inform the
requestor of the additional charge to receive copies of the public records that are
available on its website. If the public body has included the website address for a
record in its written response to the requestor and the requestor thereafter
https://legislature.mi.gov/Laws/MCL?objectName=mcl-15-234

4/7

8/20/26, 11:57 AM

MCL - Section 15.234 - Michigan Legislature

stipulates that the public record be provided to him or her in a paper format or other
form as described under subsection (1)(c), the public body shall provide the public
records in the specified format but may use a fringe benefit multiplier greater than
the 50% limitation in subsection (2), not to exceed the actual costs of providing the
information in the specified format.
(6) A public body may provide requested information available in public records
without receipt of a written request.
(7) If a verbal request for information is for information that a public body believes
is available on the public body's website, the public employee shall, where
practicable and to the best of the public employee's knowledge, inform the
requestor about the public body's pertinent website address.
(8) In either the public body's initial response or subsequent response as
described under section 5(2)(d), the public body may require a good-faith deposit
from the person requesting information before providing the public records to the
requestor if the entire fee estimate or charge authorized under this section exceeds
$50.00, based on a good-faith calculation of the total fee described in subsection
(4). Subject to subsection (10), the deposit must not exceed 1/2 of the total
estimated fee, and a public body's request for a deposit must include a detailed
itemization as required under subsection (4). The response must also contain a
best efforts estimate by the public body regarding the time frame it will take the
public body to comply with the law in providing the public records to the requestor.
The time frame estimate is nonbinding upon the public body, but the public body
shall provide the estimate in good faith and strive to be reasonably accurate and to
provide the public records in a manner based on this state's public policy under
section 1 and the nature of the request in the particular instance. If a public body
does not respond in a timely manner as described under section 5(2), it is not
relieved from its requirements to provide proper fee calculations and time frame
estimates in any tardy responses. Providing an estimated time frame does not
relieve a public body from any of the other requirements of this act.
(9) If a public body does not respond to a written request in a timely manner as
required under section 5(2), the public body shall do the following:
(a) Reduce the charges for labor costs otherwise permitted under this section by
5% for each day the public body exceeds the time permitted under section 5(2) for
a response to the request, with a maximum 50% reduction, if either of the following
applies:
(i) The late response was willful and intentional.
(ii) The written request included language that conveyed a request for information
within the first 250 words of the body of a letter, facsimile, electronic mail, or
electronic mail attachment, or specifically included the words, characters, or
abbreviations for "freedom of information", "information", "FOIA", "copy", or a
recognizable misspelling of such, or appropriate legal code reference for this act,
on the front of an envelope, or in the subject line of an electronic mail, letter, or
facsimile cover page.
(b) If a charge reduction is required under subdivision (a), fully note the charge
reduction on the detailed itemization described under subsection (4).
(10) This section does not apply to public records prepared under an act or
statute specifically authorizing the sale of those public records to the public, or if the
amount of the fee for providing a copy of the public record is otherwise specifically
provided by an act or statute.
https://legislature.mi.gov/Laws/MCL?objectName=mcl-15-234

5/7

8/20/26, 11:57 AM

MCL - Section 15.234 - Michigan Legislature

(11) Subject to subsection (12), after a public body has granted and fulfilled a
written request from an individual under this act, if the public body has not been
paid in full the total amount under subsection (1) for the copies of public records
that the public body made available to the individual as a result of that written
request, the public body may require a deposit of up to 100% of the estimated fee
before it begins a full public record search for any subsequent written request from
that individual if all of the following apply:
(a) The final fee for the prior written request was not more than 105% of the
estimated fee.
(b) The public records made available contained the information being sought in
the prior written request and are still in the public body's possession.
(c) The public records were made available to the individual, subject to payment,
within the time frame estimate described under subsection (8).
(d) Ninety days have passed since the public body notified the individual in
writing that the public records were available for pickup or mailing.
(e) The individual is unable to show proof of prior payment to the public body.
(f) The public body calculates a detailed itemization, as required under
subsection (4), that is the basis for the current written request's increased estimated
fee deposit.
(12) A public body shall no longer require an increased estimated fee deposit
from an individual as described under subsection (11) if any of the following apply:
(a) The individual is able to show proof of prior payment in full to the public body.
(b) The public body is subsequently paid in full for the applicable prior written
request.
(c) Three hundred sixty-five days have passed since the individual made the
written request for which full payment was not remitted to the public body.
(13) A deposit required by a public body under this act is a fee.
(14) If a deposit that is required under subsection (8) or (11) is not received by
the public body within 45 days from receipt by the requesting person of the notice
that a deposit is required, and if the requesting person has not filed an appeal of the
deposit amount pursuant to section 10a, the request shall be considered
abandoned by the requesting person and the public body is no longer required to
fulfill the request. Notice of a deposit requirement under subsection (8) or (11) is
considered received 3 days after it is sent, regardless of the means of transmission.
Notice of a deposit requirement under subsection (8) or (11) must include notice of
the date by which the deposit must be received, which date is 48 days after the
date the notice is sent.
History: 1976, Act 442, Eff. Apr. 13, 1977 ;-- Am. 1988, Act 99, Imd. Eff. Apr. 11, 1988 ;-Am. 1996, Act 553, Eff. Mar. 31, 1997 ;-- Am. 2014, Act 563, Eff. July 1, 2015 ;-- Am.
2018, Act 523, Imd. Eff. Dec. 28, 2018 ;-- Am. 2020, Act 38, Imd. Eff. Mar. 3, 2020
Constitutionality: The disclosure of public records under the freedom of information act
impartially to the general public for the incremental cost of creating the record is not a
granting of credit by the state in aid of private persons and does not justify nondisclosure
on the theory that the information is proprietary information belonging to a public body.
Kestenbaum v Michigan State University, 414 Mich 510; 417 NW2d 1102 (1982).
Popular Name: Act 442
Popular Name: FOIA
https://legislature.mi.gov/Laws/MCL?objectName=mcl-15-234

6/7

8/20/26, 11:57 AM

MCL - Section 15.234 - Michigan Legislature

Acceptable Use Policy Privacy Policy DMCA Policy Comment Form
Legislative Directory Accessibility Site Map
Bills

Meetings

Laws

The Michigan Legislature Website is a free service of the Legislative Service Bureau in
cooperation with the Michigan Legislative Council, the Michigan House of
Representatives, the Michigan Senate, and the Library of Michigan. This site is intended
to provide accurate and timely legislative information to the citizens of the State of
Michigan and other interested parties. Additional historical documents can be found at
https://www.michigan.gov/libraryofmichigan. The information obtained from this site is not
intended to replace official versions of that information and is subject to revision. The
Legislature presents this information, without warranties, express or implied, regarding the
accuracy of the information, timeliness, or completeness. If you believe the information is
inaccurate, out-of-date, or incomplete or if you have problems accessing or reading the
information, please send your concerns to the appropriate agency using the online
Comment Form in the bar above this text.

https://legislature.mi.gov/Laws/MCL?objectName=mcl-15-234

7/7

