PROVENANCE: Supplied by Kevin 2026-08-20 (exchange/ny/'Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) _ OTDA.pdf', text-extracted).
SOURCE: NY Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance FOIL page (otda.ny.gov), fetched 2026-08-20.
CAUTION: AGENCY-SPECIFIC guidance page restating POL § 87(1) for one state agency — NOT municipal authority. Illustration only.
----------------------------------------------------------------
8/20/26, 2:47 PM

Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) | OTDA

Skip to content Skip to site navigation Skip to page navigation
An official website of New York State.
Here's how you know

Search OTDA
Search OTDA

Search entire site

Navigation menu Search
New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance
About
Programs & Services
Laws & Policies
Resources & Reports
Forms
How to Apply

Freedom of Information Law (FOIL)
Request OTDA Records Through The New York State Freedom of
Information Law
Section Navigation

Overview
Request Records
FOIL Process
Right to Appeal
Subject Matter List
Helpful Tips
OTDA Home Laws & Policies FOIL Requests

Overview
The Freedom of Information Law (“FOIL”), Article 6 (Sections 84-90) of the NYS Public Officers Law,
provides the public right to access to records maintained by government agencies with certain exceptions.
“Record” means any information kept, held, filed, produced or reproduced by, with, or for this agency, in any
physical form whatsoever including, but not limited to, reports, statements, examinations, memoranda, opinions,
folders, files, books, manuals, pamphlets, forms, papers, designs, drawings, maps, photos, letters, microfilms,
computer tapes or disks, rules, regulations or codes.
If you would like YOUR records from this agency, you may not have to file a FOIL request. Find out more.

https://otda.ny.gov/legal/foil/#request-records

1/5

8/20/26, 2:47 PM

Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) | OTDA

Request Records
Use the online form
SUBMIT A FOIL REQUEST
Mail a written request to:
Records Access Officer
New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance
40 North Pearl, 16th floor
Albany, NY 12243
Email a written request to:
nyspio@otda.ny.gov
Fax a written request to: 518-486-6935
Submit a written request for records in person:
New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance
40 North Pearl Street
Albany, NY 12243
Between: 8:30 AM and 5:00 PM, on business days
Upon entering the main entrance of the building, advise Security Staff that you would like to request records.
Security Staff will contact the Records Access Office, and a staff member will provide assistance. Please be
advised records require review prior to disclosure. As a result, documents and records will not be immediately
available.

FOIL Process
Within five business days of the receipt of a written request for a record reasonably described, we will send you
a letter either: making such record available; denying such request in writing; or furnishing a written
acknowledgment of the receipt of such request. If you have not received a letter within five business days, please
contact us at 518-474-9516 or nyspio@otda.ny.gov.
An acknowledgment letter will provide you with an estimate of when the records you request will be available,
which shall be reasonable under the circumstances of the request. This date is determined by the number of
documents you request, their format, their availability, the time it takes to redact any information that cannot be
disclosed pursuant to FOIL, the time it takes to assemble the documents, and other factors.
If the records you request require a fee to be paid, you will be notified prior to the records being released to you.
Unless a different fee is otherwise prescribed by statute, Public Officers Law §87(1) authorizes an agency to
charge a fee of 25¢ per copy for copies of records up 9”x 14”, or the actual cost of reproducing a record. In
determining the actual cost of producing a record, an agency may include only:
an amount equal to the hourly salary attributed to the lowest paid agency employee who has the necessary
skill required to prepare the requested record(s), if at least two hours of agency employee time is needed to
prepare a copy of the record requested;
the actual cost of the storage devices or media provided to the person making the request in complying
with such request; and
https://otda.ny.gov/legal/foil/#request-records

2/5

8/20/26, 2:47 PM

Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) | OTDA

the actual cost to the agency of engaging an outside professional service to prepare a copy of a record, but
only when an agency's information technology equipment is inadequate to prepare a copy, if such service
is used to prepare the copy.
Once the requested records are prepared, you may receive the records via email, fax, paper, CD/DVD, or USB.
Records are available for inspection, by appointment, on business days between 8:30 AM and 5:00 PM at the
Records Access Office, 40 North Pearl Street, Albany, NY 12243. You may schedule an appointment for inperson inspection of records by calling 518-474-9516.

Right to Appeal
Under provisions of the Public Officers Law you may appeal a FOIL determination. If you desire to submit such
an appeal, you must do so within 30 days of the written response to your FOIL request. Please include a copy of
the original request for records and a copy of the FOIL response letter you received along with your appeal letter
to:
Records Appeal Officer
New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance
40 North Pearl, 16th floor
Albany, NY 12243
You will be informed in writing of the decision within ten business days of our receipt of such an appeal. Please
indicate the FOIL Request Number when corresponding on this subject.

Subject Matter List
The following is a current list of records, by subject matter, that are maintained by this agency. Some of the
listed records may be exempt from disclosure pursuant to the Freedom of Information Law.
View Subject Matter List

Helpful Tips
For more information about FOIL, please visit the New York State Committee on Open Government’s website.
When submitting a FOIL request:
Be as specific as possible in describing the requested records. Include relevant dates, names, descriptions,
etc.
Specify whether you would like to inspect the records or have copies of the records sent to you.
If records are available, specify how you want them sent, i.e., via US mail, email or fax. We may choose to
send the records by U.S. mail, if you have requested a large volume of records, for security or other
important reasons. We will notify you of any charge for reproducing such records before they are sent to
you.
Include your email, mailing address and fax number, as well as a telephone number where you can be
reached during business hours, if it is necessary to clarify your request.
Please note that the agency is not required to create a new record in response to FOIL requests.
Back to Top

Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance
https://otda.ny.gov/legal/foil/#request-records

3/5

8/20/26, 2:47 PM

Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) | OTDA

Home
Site map
Contact OTDA
Contracts & Grants
Freedom of Information Law (FOIL)
Job Opportunities
Website Accessibility
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Reasonable Accommodation
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility
Child Poverty Reduction Advisory Council (CPRAC)
Interagency Task Force on Human Trafficking (ITF)
Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP) Block Grant Advisory Council (BGAC)
Family Voice Forum

Programs
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP)
Temporary Assistance
Child Support
Fair Hearings
See all Programs and Services

Resources
myBenefits.ny.gov
Resources for Working Families
mySSP Portal
Forms
Report Welfare Fraud
Laws & Policies
News & Public Information
Local Departments of Social Services
Language Assistance Services
Website Language Translations
OTDA's Public Benefits Survey

Select a Language
English
‫العربية‬
বাংলা
中文
繁體中文
Français
Kreyòl Ayisyen
Italiano
한국어
Polski
https://otda.ny.gov/legal/foil/#request-records

4/5

8/20/26, 2:47 PM

Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) | OTDA

Русский
Español
‫ودرا‬
‫אידיש‬

CONNECT WITH US
FACEBOOK
X
YOUTUBE
INSTAGRAM

https://otda.ny.gov/legal/foil/#request-records

5/5

