PROVENANCE: Supplied by Kevin 2026-08-20 (exchange/oregon192.pdf, text-extracted).
SOURCE: oregonlegislature.gov official ORS Chapter 192 page, current published edition; § 192.324 history ends '2025 c.30 §1'. Includes 192.311 (definitions), 192.314, 192.318, 192.324 (fees), 192.329 (response), and the exemption sections (192.345, 192.355 et seq.).
CAVEAT: Page header notes ch. 192 sections were amended/added in the 2026 regular session (see 2026 A&R Tables; 2026 Session Laws ch. 93). At discover time, check whether 2026 c.93 touches 192.324/192.329; the printed base text predates incorporation of 2026 acts.
----------------------------------------------------------------
Oregon Revised Statutes
Chapter 192 — Records; Public Reports and Meetings
ORS sections in this chapter were amended or repealed by the Legislative Assembly during its 2026
regular session. See the table of ORS sections amended or repealed during the 2026 regular
session: 2026 A&R Tables
New sections of law were added by legislative action to this ORS chapter or to a series within this ORS
chapter by the Legislative Assembly during its 2026 regular session. See sections in the following 2026
Oregon Laws chapters: 2026 Session Laws 0093

INSPECTION OF PUBLIC RECORDS
(Definitions)
192.311 Definitions for ORS 192.311 to 192.478. As used in ORS 192.311 to
192.478:
(1) “Business day” means a day other than Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday and
on which at least one paid employee of the public body that received the public records
request is scheduled to and does report to work. In the case of a community college
district, community college service district, public university, school district or
education service district, “business day” does not include any day on which the central
administration offices of the district or university are closed.
(2) “Custodian” means:
(a) The person described in ORS 7.110 for purposes of court records; or
(b) A public body mandated, directly or indirectly, to create, maintain, care for or
control a public record. “Custodian” does not include a public body that has custody of a
public record as an agent of another public body that is the custodian unless the public
record is not otherwise available.
(3) “Person” includes any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm, association
or member or committee of the Legislative Assembly.
(4) “Public body” includes every state officer, agency, department, division, bureau,
board and commission; every county and city governing body, school district, special

district, municipal corporation, and any board, department, commission, council, or
agency thereof; and any other public agency of this state.
(5)(a) “Public record” includes any writing that contains information relating to the
conduct of the public’s business, including but not limited to court records, mortgages,
and deed records, prepared, owned, used or retained by a public body regardless of
physical form or characteristics.
(b) “Public record” does not include any writing that does not relate to the conduct of
the public’s business and that is contained on a privately owned computer.
(6) “State agency” means any state officer, department, board, commission or court
created by the Constitution or statutes of this state but does not include the Legislative
Assembly or its members, committees, officers or employees insofar as they are exempt
under section 9, Article IV of the Oregon Constitution.
(7) “Writing” means handwriting, typewriting, printing, photographing and every
means of recording, including letters, words, pictures, sounds, or symbols, or
combination thereof, and all papers, maps, files, facsimiles or electronic recordings.
[Formerly 192.410]
(Public Records Request Processing)
192.314 Right to inspect public records; notice to public body attorney. (1) Every
person has a right to inspect any public record of a public body in this state, except as
otherwise expressly provided by ORS 192.338, 192.345 and 192.355.
(2)(a) If a person who is a party to a civil judicial proceeding to which a public body
is a party, or who has filed a notice under ORS 30.275 (5)(a), asks to inspect or to
receive a copy of a public record that the person knows relates to the proceeding or
notice, the person must submit the request in writing to the custodian and, at the same
time, to the attorney for the public body.
(b) For purposes of this subsection:
(A) The attorney for a state agency is the Attorney General in Salem.
(B) “Person” includes a representative or agent of the person. [Formerly 192.420]
192.318 Functions of custodian of public records; rules. (1) The custodian of any
public records, including public records maintained in machine readable or electronic
form, unless otherwise expressly provided by statute, shall furnish proper and reasonable
opportunities for inspection and examination of the records in the office of the custodian
and reasonable facilities for making memoranda or abstracts therefrom, during the usual
business hours, to all persons having occasion to make examination of them. If the

public record is maintained in machine readable or electronic form, the custodian shall
furnish proper and reasonable opportunity to assure access.
(2) The custodian of the records may adopt reasonable rules necessary for the
protection of the records and to prevent interference with the regular discharge of duties
of the custodian. [Formerly 192.430]
192.324 Copies or inspection of public records; public body response; fees;
procedure for records requests. (1) A public body that is the custodian of any public
record that a person has a right to inspect shall give the person, upon receipt of a written
request:
(a) A copy of the public record if the public record is of a nature permitting copying;
or
(b) A reasonable opportunity to inspect or copy the public record.
(2) If an individual who is identified in a public body’s procedure described in
subsection (7)(a) of this section receives a written request to inspect or receive a copy of
a public record, the public body shall within five business days after receiving the
request acknowledge receipt of the request or complete the public body’s response to the
request. An acknowledgment under this subsection must:
(a) Confirm that the public body is the custodian of the requested record;
(b) Inform the requester that the public body is not the custodian of the requested
record; or
(c) Notify the requester that the public body is uncertain whether the public body is
the custodian of the requested record.
(3) If the public record is maintained in a machine readable or electronic form, the
public body shall provide a copy of the public record in the form requested, if available.
If the public record is not available in the form requested, the public body shall make the
public record available in the form in which the public body maintains the public record.
(4)(a) The public body may establish fees reasonably calculated to reimburse the
public body for the public body’s actual cost of making public records available,
including costs for summarizing, compiling or tailoring the public records, either in
organization or media, to meet the request.
(b) The public body may include in a fee established under paragraph (a) of this
subsection the cost of time spent by an attorney for the public body in reviewing the
public records, redacting material from the public records or segregating the public
records into exempt and nonexempt records. The public body may not include in a fee
established under paragraph (a) of this subsection the cost of time spent by an attorney

for the public body in determining the application of the provisions of ORS 192.311 to
192.478.
(c) The public body may not establish a fee greater than $25 under this section unless
the public body first provides the requester with a written notification of the estimated
amount of the fee and the requester confirms that the requester wants the public body to
proceed with making the public record available.
(d) Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) to (c) of this subsection, when the public records
are those filed with:
(A) The Secretary of State under ORS chapter 79A or ORS 81.230 to 81.263, the fees
for furnishing copies, summaries or compilations of the public records are the fees
established by the Secretary of State by rule under ORS chapter 79A or ORS 81.230 to
81.263.
(B) A county clerk, the fees for copies of records are the fees established under ORS
205.320.
(5) The custodian of a public record may furnish copies without charge or at a
substantially reduced fee if the custodian determines that the waiver or reduction of fees
is in the public interest because making the record available primarily benefits the
general public.
(6) A requester who believes that there has been an unreasonable denial of a fee
waiver or fee reduction may petition the Attorney General or the district attorney in the
same manner as a requester who petitions when inspection of a public record is denied
under ORS 192.311 to 192.478. The Attorney General, the district attorney and the court
have the same authority in instances when a fee waiver or reduction is denied as when
inspection of a public record is denied.
(7) A public body shall make available to the public a written procedure for making
public records requests that includes:
(a) The name of one or more individuals within the public body to whom public
records requests may be sent, with addresses; and
(b) The amounts of and the manner of calculating fees that the public body charges
for responding to requests for public records.
(8) This section does not apply to signatures of individuals submitted under ORS
chapter 247 for purposes of registering to vote as provided in ORS 247.973. [Formerly
192.440; 2025 c.30 §1]
192.329 Public body’s response to public records request. (1) A public body shall
complete its response to a written public records request that is received by an individual

identified in the public body’s procedure described in ORS 192.324 as soon as
practicable and without unreasonable delay.
(2) A public body’s response to a public records request is complete when the public
body:
(a) Provides access to or copies of all requested records within the possession or
custody of the public body that the public body does not assert are exempt from public
disclosure, or explains where the records are already publicly available;
(b) Asserts any exemptions from disclosure that the public body believes apply to any
requested records and, if the public body cites ORS 192.355 (8) or (9), identifies the
state or federal law that the public body relied on in asserting the exemptions;
(c) Complies with ORS 192.338;
(d) To the extent that the public body is not the custodian of records that have been
requested, provides a written statement to that effect;
(e) To the extent that state or federal law prohibits the public body from
acknowledging whether any requested record exists or that acknowledging whether a
requested record exists would result in the loss of federal benefits or imposition of
another sanction, provides a written statement to that effect, citing the state or federal
law that the public body relies on, unless the written statement itself would violate state
or federal law; and
(f) If the public body asserts that one or more requested records are exempt from
public disclosure, includes a statement that the requester may seek review of the public
body’s determination pursuant to ORS 192.401, 192.411, 192.415, 192.418, 192.422,
192.427 and 192.431.
(3)(a) If a public body has informed a requester of a fee permitted under ORS
192.324 (4), the obligation of the public body to complete its response to the request is
suspended until the requester has paid the fee, the fee has been waived by the public
body pursuant to ORS 192.324 (5) or the fee otherwise has been ordered waived.
(b) If the requester fails to pay the fee within 60 days of the date on which the public
body informed the requester of the fee, or fails to pay the fee within 60 days of the date
on which the public body informed the requester of the denial of the fee waiver, the
public body shall close the request.
(4)(a) A public body may request additional information or clarification from a
requester of public records for the purpose of expediting the public body’s response to
the request. If the public body has requested additional information or clarification in
good faith, the public body’s obligation to further complete its response to the request is

suspended until the requester provides the requested information or clarification or
affirmatively declines to provide that information or clarification.
(b) If the requester fails to respond within 60 days to a good faith request from the
public body for information or clarification, the public body shall close the request.
(5) As soon as reasonably possible but not later than 10 business days after the date
by which a public body is required to acknowledge receipt of the request under ORS
192.324, a public body shall:
(a) Complete its response to the public records request; or
(b) Provide a written statement that the public body is still processing the request and
a reasonable estimated date by which the public body expects to complete its response
based on the information currently available.
(6) The time periods established by ORS 192.324 and subsection (5) of this section
do not apply to a public body if compliance would be impracticable because:
(a) The staff or volunteers necessary to complete a response to the public records
request are unavailable;
(b) Compliance would demonstrably impede the public body’s ability to perform
other necessary services; or
(c) Of the volume of public records requests being simultaneously processed by the
public body.
(7) For purposes of this section, staff members or volunteers who are on leave or are
not scheduled to work are considered to be unavailable.
(8) A public body that cannot comply with the time periods established by ORS
192.324 and subsection (5) of this section for a reason listed in subsection (6) of this
section shall, as soon as practicable and without unreasonable delay, acknowledge a
public records request and complete the response to the request. [2017 c.456 §4]
Note: 192.329, 192.335 and 192.340 were added to and made a part of 192.311 to
192.478 by legislative action but were not added to any smaller series therein. See
Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.
192.335 Immunity from liability for disclosure of public record; effect of
disclosure on privilege. (1) A public body that, acting in good faith, discloses a public
record in response to a request for public records is not liable for any loss or damages
based on the disclosure unless the disclosure is affirmatively prohibited by state or
federal law or by a court order applicable to the public body. Nothing in this subsection
shall be interpreted to create liability on the part of a public body, or create a cause of
action against a public body, based on the disclosure of a public record.

(2) A public body that discloses any information or record in response to a written
request for public records under ORS 192.311 to 192.478 that is privileged under ORS
40.225 to 40.295 does not waive its right to assert the applicable privilege to prevent the
introduction of the information or record as evidence pursuant to ORS 40.225 to 40.295.
[2017 c.456 §8]
Note: See note under 192.329.
192.338 Exempt and nonexempt public record to be separated. If any public
record contains material which is not exempt under ORS 192.345 and 192.355, as well
as material which is exempt from disclosure, the public body shall separate the exempt
and nonexempt material and make the nonexempt material available for examination.
[Formerly 192.505]
Note: 192.338, 192.345 and 192.355 were made a part of 192.311 to 192.478 by
legislative action but were not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to
Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.
(Exemptions)
192.340 Attorney General catalog of exemptions from disclosure. (1) The
Attorney General shall maintain and regularly update a catalog of exemptions created by
Oregon statute from the disclosure requirements of ORS 192.311 to 192.478. The
catalog must be as comprehensive as reasonably possible and must be freely available to
the public in an electronic format that facilitates sorting and searching of the catalog.
(2) The catalog required by subsection (1) of this section must include the following
information for each exemption:
(a) A citation to the Oregon statute or statutes creating the exemption from the
disclosure requirements of ORS 192.311 to 192.478;
(b) The relevant text of each statute creating the exemption;
(c) If the exemption has been construed by a decision of the Oregon Supreme Court
or Court of Appeals, a citation to that decision;
(d) To the extent that the exemption is specific to a particular public body or
particular types of public bodies, a description of the public body or bodies to which the
exemption relates; and
(e) Additional information as the Attorney General deems appropriate.

(3) To help ensure that the catalog required by subsection (1) of this section is as
comprehensive as possible:
(a) The Legislative Counsel shall provide the Attorney General with an electronic
copy of any Act passed by the Legislative Assembly that, in the judgment of the
Legislative Counsel, creates an exemption from the disclosure requirements of ORS
192.311 to 192.478; and
(b) When a district attorney issues an order pursuant to ORS 192.415, the district
attorney shall send the Attorney General an electronic copy of that order.
(4) The purpose of the catalog required by subsection (1) of this section is to assist
public officials and members of the public in ascertaining what information is exempt
from the public disclosure requirements of ORS 192.311 to 192.478. The catalog is not
intended to provide legal advice to public bodies or to members of the public.
(5) A public body may assert that an Oregon statute exempts a public record in the
custody of the public body from disclosure even if that statute is not listed in the catalog
or the catalog does not include that public body in the catalog’s description of the public
bodies to which that exemption applies. [2017 c.456 §7]
Note: See note under 192.329.
192.345 Public records conditionally exempt from disclosure. The following
public records are exempt from disclosure under ORS 192.311 to 192.478 unless the
public interest requires disclosure in the particular instance:
(1) Records of a public body pertaining to litigation to which the public body is a
party if the complaint has been filed, or if the complaint has not been filed, if the public
body shows that such litigation is reasonably likely to occur. This exemption does not
apply to litigation which has been concluded, and nothing in this subsection shall limit
any right or opportunity granted by discovery or deposition statutes to a party to
litigation or potential litigation.
(2) Trade secrets. “Trade secrets,” as used in this section, may include, but are not
limited to, any formula, plan, pattern, process, tool, mechanism, compound, procedure,
production data, or compilation of information which is not patented, which is known
only to certain individuals within an organization and which is used in a business it
conducts, having actual or potential commercial value, and which gives its user an
opportunity to obtain a business advantage over competitors who do not know or use it.
(3) Investigatory information compiled for criminal law purposes. The record of an
arrest or the report of a crime shall be disclosed unless and only for so long as there is a
clear need to delay disclosure in the course of a specific investigation, including the

need to protect the complaining party or the victim. Nothing in this subsection shall limit
any right constitutionally guaranteed, or granted by statute, to disclosure or discovery in
criminal cases. For purposes of this subsection, the record of an arrest or the report of a
crime includes, but is not limited to:
(a) The arrested person’s name, age, residence, employment, marital status and
similar biographical information;
(b) The offense with which the arrested person is charged;
(c) The conditions of release pursuant to ORS 135.230 to 135.290;
(d) The identity of and biographical information concerning both complaining party
and victim;
(e) The identity of the investigating and arresting agency and the length of the
investigation;
(f) The circumstances of arrest, including time, place, resistance, pursuit and
weapons used; and
(g) Such information as may be necessary to enlist public assistance in apprehending
fugitives from justice.
(4) Test questions, scoring keys, and other data used to administer a licensing
examination, employment, academic or other examination or testing procedure before
the examination is given and if the examination is to be used again. Records establishing
procedures for and instructing persons administering, grading or evaluating an
examination or testing procedure are included in this exemption, to the extent that
disclosure would create a risk that the result might be affected.
(5) Information consisting of production records, sale or purchase records or catch
records, or similar business records of a private concern or enterprise, required by law to
be submitted to or inspected by a governmental body to allow it to determine fees or
assessments payable or to establish production quotas, and the amounts of such fees or
assessments payable or paid, to the extent that such information is in a form that would
permit identification of the individual concern or enterprise. This exemption does not
include records submitted by long term care facilities as defined in ORS 442.015 to the
state for purposes of reimbursement of expenses or determining fees for patient care.
Nothing in this subsection shall limit the use that can be made of such information for
regulatory purposes or its admissibility in any enforcement proceeding.
(6) Information relating to the appraisal of real estate prior to its acquisition.
(7) The names and signatures of employees who sign authorization cards or petitions
for the purpose of requesting representation or decertification elections.

(8) Investigatory information relating to any complaint filed under ORS 659A.820 or
659A.825, until such time as the complaint is resolved under ORS 659A.835, or a final
order is issued under ORS 659A.850.
(9) Investigatory information relating to any complaint or charge filed under ORS
243.676 and 663.180.
(10) Records, reports and other information received or compiled by the Director of
the Department of Consumer and Business Services under ORS 697.732.
(11) Information concerning the location of archaeological sites or objects as those
terms are defined in ORS 358.905, except if the governing body of an Indian tribe
requests the information and the need for the information is related to that Indian tribe’s
cultural or religious activities. This exemption does not include information relating to a
site that is all or part of an existing, commonly known and publicized tourist facility or
attraction.
(12) A personnel discipline action, or materials or documents supporting that action.
(13) Fish and wildlife information developed pursuant to ORS 496.004, 496.172 and
498.026 or ORS 496.192 and 564.100, regarding the habitat, location or population of
any threatened species or endangered species.
(14) Writings prepared by or under the direction of faculty of public educational
institutions, in connection with research, until publicly released, copyrighted or patented.
(15) Computer programs developed or purchased by or for any public body for its
own use. As used in this subsection, “computer program” means a series of instructions
or statements which permit the functioning of a computer system in a manner designed
to provide storage, retrieval and manipulation of data from such computer system, and
any associated documentation and source material that explain how to operate the
computer program. “Computer program” does not include:
(a) The original data, including but not limited to numbers, text, voice, graphics and
images;
(b) Analyses, compilations and other manipulated forms of the original data produced
by use of the program; or
(c) The mathematical and statistical formulas which would be used if the manipulated
forms of the original data were to be produced manually.
(16) Data and information provided by participants to mediation under ORS 36.256.
(17) Investigatory information relating to any complaint or charge filed under ORS
chapter 654, until a final administrative determination is made or, if a citation is issued,
until an employer receives notice of any citation.

(18) Specific operational plans in connection with an anticipated threat to individual
or public safety for deployment and use of personnel and equipment, prepared or used
by a public body, if public disclosure of the plans would endanger an individual’s life or
physical safety or jeopardize a law enforcement activity.
(19)(a) Audits or audit reports required of a telecommunications carrier. As used in
this paragraph, “audit or audit report” means any external or internal audit or audit
report pertaining to a telecommunications carrier, as defined in ORS 133.721, or
pertaining to a corporation having an affiliated interest, as defined in ORS 759.390, with
a telecommunications carrier that is intended to make the operations of the entity more
efficient, accurate or compliant with applicable rules, procedures or standards, that may
include self-criticism and that has been filed by the telecommunications carrier or
affiliate under compulsion of state law. “Audit or audit report” does not mean an audit of
a cost study that would be discoverable in a contested case proceeding and that is not
subject to a protective order; and
(b) Financial statements. As used in this paragraph, “financial statement” means a
financial statement of a nonregulated corporation having an affiliated interest, as defined
in ORS 759.390, with a telecommunications carrier, as defined in ORS 133.721.
(20) The residence address of an elector if authorized under ORS 247.965 and subject
to ORS 247.967.
(21) The following records, communications and information submitted to a housing
authority as defined in ORS 456.005, or to an urban renewal agency as defined in ORS
457.010, by applicants for and recipients of loans, grants and tax credits:
(a) Personal and corporate financial statements and information, including tax
returns;
(b) Credit reports;
(c) Project appraisals, excluding appraisals obtained in the course of transactions
involving an interest in real estate that is acquired, leased, rented, exchanged, transferred
or otherwise disposed of as part of the project, but only after the transactions have closed
and are concluded;
(d) Market studies and analyses;
(e) Articles of incorporation, partnership agreements and operating agreements;
(f) Commitment letters;
(g) Project pro forma statements;
(h) Project cost certifications and cost data;
(i) Audits;
(j) Project tenant correspondence requested to be confidential;

(k) Tenant files relating to certification; and
(L) Housing assistance payment requests.
(22) Records or information that, if disclosed, would allow a person to:
(a) Gain unauthorized access to buildings or other property;
(b) Identify those areas of structural or operational vulnerability that would permit
unlawful disruption to, or interference with, services; or
(c) Disrupt, interfere with or gain unauthorized access to public funds or to
information processing, communication or telecommunication systems, including the
information contained in the systems, that are used or operated by a public body.
(23) Records or information that would reveal or otherwise identify security
measures, or weaknesses or potential weaknesses in security measures, taken or
recommended to be taken to protect:
(a) An individual;
(b) Buildings or other property;
(c) Information processing, communication or telecommunication systems, including
the information contained in the systems; or
(d) Those operations of the Oregon State Lottery the security of which are subject to
study and evaluation under ORS 461.180 (6).
(24) Personal information held by or under the direction of officials of the Oregon
Health and Science University or a public university listed in ORS 352.002 about a
person who has or who is interested in donating money or property to the Oregon Health
and Science University or a public university, if the information is related to the family
of the person, personal assets of the person or is incidental information not related to the
donation.
(25) The home address, professional address and telephone number of a person who
has or who is interested in donating money or property to a public university listed in
ORS 352.002.
(26) Records of the name and address of a person who files a report with or pays an
assessment to a commodity commission established under ORS 576.051 to 576.455, the
Oregon Beef Council created under ORS 577.210 or the Oregon Wheat Commission
created under ORS 578.030.
(27) Information provided to, obtained by or used by a public body to authorize,
originate, receive or authenticate a transfer of funds, including but not limited to a credit
card number, payment card expiration date, password, financial institution account
number and financial institution routing number.
(28) Social Security numbers as provided in ORS 107.840.

(29) The electronic mail address of a student who attends a public university listed in
ORS 352.002 or Oregon Health and Science University.
(30) The name, home address, professional address or location of a person that is
engaged in, or that provides goods or services for, medical research at Oregon Health
and Science University that is conducted using animals other than rodents. This
subsection does not apply to Oregon Health and Science University press releases,
websites or other publications circulated to the general public.
(31) If requested by a public safety officer, as defined in ORS 181A.355, or a county
juvenile department employee who is charged with and primarily performs duties related
to the custody, control or supervision of adjudicated youths confined in a detention
facility, as defined in ORS 419A.004:
(a) The home address and home telephone number of the public safety officer or
county juvenile department employee contained in the voter registration records for the
officer or employee.
(b) The home address and home telephone number of the public safety officer or
county juvenile department employee contained in records of the Department of Public
Safety Standards and Training.
(c) The name of the public safety officer or county juvenile department employee
contained in county real property assessment or taxation records. This exemption:
(A) Applies only to the name of the officer or employee and any other owner of the
property in connection with a specific property identified by the officer or employee in a
request for exemption from disclosure;
(B) Applies only to records that may be made immediately available to the public
upon request in person, by telephone or using the Internet;
(C) Applies until the officer or employee requests termination of the exemption;
(D) Does not apply to disclosure of records among public bodies as defined in ORS
174.109 for governmental purposes; and
(E) May not result in liability for the county if the name of the officer or employee is
disclosed after a request for exemption from disclosure is made under this subsection.
(32) Unless the public records request is made by a financial institution, as defined in
ORS 706.008, consumer finance company licensed under ORS chapter 725, mortgage
banker or mortgage broker licensed under ORS 86A.095 to 86A.198, or title company
for business purposes, records described in paragraph (a) of this subsection, if the
exemption from disclosure of the records is sought by an individual described in
paragraph (b) of this subsection using the procedure described in paragraph (c) of this
subsection:

(a) The home address, home or cellular telephone number or personal electronic mail
address contained in the records of any public body that has received the request that is
set forth in:
(A) A warranty deed, deed of trust, mortgage, lien, deed of reconveyance, release,
satisfaction, substitution of trustee, easement, dog license, marriage license or military
discharge record that is in the possession of the county clerk; or
(B) Any public record of a public body other than the county clerk.
(b) The individual claiming the exemption from disclosure must be a district attorney,
a deputy district attorney, the Attorney General or an assistant attorney general, the
United States Attorney for the District of Oregon or an assistant United States attorney
for the District of Oregon, a city attorney who engages in the prosecution of criminal
matters or a deputy city attorney who engages in the prosecution of criminal matters.
(c) The individual claiming the exemption from disclosure must do so by filing the
claim in writing with the public body for which the exemption from disclosure is being
claimed on a form prescribed by the public body. Unless the claim is filed with the
county clerk, the claim form shall list the public records in the possession of the public
body to which the exemption applies. The exemption applies until the individual
claiming the exemption requests termination of the exemption or ceases to qualify for
the exemption.
(33) The following voluntary conservation agreements and reports:
(a) Land management plans required for voluntary stewardship agreements entered
into under ORS 541.973; and
(b) Written agreements relating to the conservation of greater sage grouse entered
into voluntarily by owners or occupiers of land with a soil and water conservation
district under ORS 568.550.
(34) Sensitive business records or financial or commercial information of the State
Accident Insurance Fund Corporation that is not customarily provided to business
competitors. This exemption does not:
(a) Apply to the formulas for determining dividends to be paid to employers insured
by the State Accident Insurance Fund Corporation;
(b) Apply to contracts for advertising, public relations or lobbying services or to
documents related to the formation of such contracts;
(c) Apply to group insurance contracts or to documents relating to the formation of
such contracts, except that employer account records shall remain exempt from
disclosure as provided in ORS 192.355 (35); or

(d) Provide the basis for opposing the discovery of documents in litigation pursuant
to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
(35) Records of the Department of Public Safety Standards and Training relating to
investigations conducted under ORS 181A.640 or 181A.870 (6), until the department
issues the report described in ORS 181A.640 or 181A.870.
(36) A medical examiner’s report, autopsy report or laboratory test report ordered by
a medical examiner under ORS 146.117.
(37) Any document or other information related to an audit of a public body, as
defined in ORS 174.109, that is in the custody of an auditor or audit organization
operating under nationally recognized government auditing standards, until the auditor
or audit organization issues a final audit report in accordance with those standards or the
audit is abandoned. This exemption does not prohibit disclosure of a draft audit report
that is provided to the audited entity for the entity’s response to the audit findings.
(38)(a) Personally identifiable information collected as part of an electronic fare
collection system of a mass transit system.
(b) The exemption from disclosure in paragraph (a) of this subsection does not apply
to public records that have attributes of anonymity that are sufficient, or that are
aggregated into groupings that are broad enough, to ensure that persons cannot be
identified by disclosure of the public records.
(c) As used in this subsection:
(A) “Electronic fare collection system” means the software and hardware used for,
associated with or relating to the collection of transit fares for a mass transit system,
including but not limited to computers, radio communication systems, personal mobile
devices, wearable technology, fare instruments, information technology, data storage or
collection equipment, or other equipment or improvements.
(B) “Mass transit system” has the meaning given that term in ORS 267.010.
(C) “Personally identifiable information” means all information relating to a person
that acquires or uses a transit pass or other fare payment medium in connection with an
electronic fare collection system, including but not limited to:
(i) Customer account information, date of birth, telephone number, physical address,
electronic mail address, credit or debit card information, bank account information,
Social Security or taxpayer identification number or other identification number, transit
pass or fare payment medium balances or history, or similar personal information; or
(ii) Travel dates, travel times, frequency of use, travel locations, service types or
vehicle use, or similar travel information.
(39)(a) If requested by a civil code enforcement officer:

(A) The home address and home telephone number of the civil code enforcement
officer contained in the voter registration records for the officer.
(B) The name of the civil code enforcement officer contained in county real property
assessment or taxation records. This exemption:
(i) Applies only to the name of the civil code enforcement officer and any other
owner of the property in connection with a specific property identified by the officer in a
request for exemption from disclosure;
(ii) Applies only to records that may be made immediately available to the public
upon request in person, by telephone or using the Internet;
(iii) Applies until the civil code enforcement officer requests termination of the
exemption;
(iv) Does not apply to disclosure of records among public bodies as defined in ORS
174.109 for governmental purposes; and
(v) May not result in liability for the county if the name of the civil code enforcement
officer is disclosed after a request for exemption from disclosure is made under this
subsection.
(b) As used in this subsection, “civil code enforcement officer” means an employee
of a public body, as defined in ORS 174.109, who is charged with enforcing laws or
ordinances relating to land use, zoning, use of rights-of-way, solid waste, hazardous
waste, sewage treatment and disposal or the state building code.
(40) Audio or video recordings, whether digital or analog, resulting from a law
enforcement officer’s operation of a video camera worn upon the officer’s person that
records the officer’s interactions with members of the public while the officer is on duty.
When a recording described in this subsection is subject to disclosure, the following
apply:
(a) Recordings that have been sealed in a court’s record of a court proceeding or
otherwise ordered by a court not to be disclosed may not be disclosed.
(b) A request for disclosure under this subsection must identify the approximate date
and time of an incident for which the recordings are requested and be reasonably tailored
to include only that material for which a public interest requires disclosure.
(c) A video recording disclosed under this subsection must, prior to disclosure, be
edited in a manner as to render the faces of all persons within the recording
unidentifiable.
(41) The contents of tips reported to a tip line, as defined in ORS 339.329. However,
personally identifiable information, as defined in ORS 339.329, is not subject to public

interest balancing under this section and remains exempt from disclosure except as
provided in ORS 339.329.
(42) Residential addresses of individuals with intellectual or developmental
disabilities residing in adult foster homes as defined in ORS 443.705 or residential
training facilities or residential training homes as those terms are defined in ORS
443.400.
(43) The name, home address, professional address or location of an individual who
is authorized to provide physical and behavioral health care services in this state and
who provides reproductive and gender-affirming health care services. [Formerly
192.501; 2019 c.61 §1; 2019 c.130 §2; 2019 c.532 §§3,4; 2021 c.318 §§1,2; 2021 c.489
§§22,23; 2023 c.228 §§39,40]
Note: See note under 192.338.
192.355 Public records exempt from disclosure. The following public records are
exempt from disclosure under ORS 192.311 to 192.478:
(1) Communications within a public body or between public bodies of an advisory
nature to the extent that they cover other than purely factual materials and are
preliminary to any final agency determination of policy or action. This exemption shall
not apply unless the public body shows that in the particular instance the public interest
in encouraging frank communication between officials and employees of public bodies
clearly outweighs the public interest in disclosure.
(2)(a) Information of a personal nature such as but not limited to that kept in a
personal, medical or similar file, if public disclosure would constitute an unreasonable
invasion of privacy, unless the public interest by clear and convincing evidence requires
disclosure in the particular instance. The party seeking disclosure shall have the burden
of showing that public disclosure would not constitute an unreasonable invasion of
privacy.
(b) Images of a dead body, or parts of a dead body, that are part of a law enforcement
agency investigation, if public disclosure would create an unreasonable invasion of
privacy of the family of the deceased person, unless the public interest by clear and
convincing evidence requires disclosure in the particular instance. The party seeking
disclosure shall have the burden of showing that public disclosure would not constitute
an unreasonable invasion of privacy.
(3) Upon compliance with ORS 192.363, public body employee or volunteer
residential addresses, residential telephone numbers, personal cellular telephone
numbers, personal electronic mail addresses, driver license numbers, employer-issued

identification card numbers, emergency contact information, Social Security numbers,
dates of birth and other telephone numbers contained in records maintained by the
public body that is the employer or the recipient of volunteer services. This exemption:
(a) Does not apply to the addresses, dates of birth and telephone numbers of
employees or volunteers who are elected officials, except that a judge or district attorney
subject to election may seek to exempt the judge’s or district attorney’s address or
telephone number, or both, under the terms of ORS 192.368;
(b) Does not apply to employees or volunteers to the extent that the party seeking
disclosure shows by clear and convincing evidence that the public interest requires
disclosure in a particular instance pursuant to ORS 192.363;
(c) Does not apply to a substitute teacher as defined in ORS 342.815 when requested
by a professional education association of which the substitute teacher may be a
member; and
(d) Does not relieve a public employer of any duty under ORS 243.650 to 243.809.
(4) Information submitted to a public body in confidence and not otherwise required
by law to be submitted, where such information should reasonably be considered
confidential, the public body has obliged itself in good faith not to disclose the
information, and when the public interest would suffer by the disclosure.
(5) Information or records of the Department of Corrections, including the State
Board of Parole and Post-Prison Supervision, to the extent that disclosure would
interfere with the rehabilitation of a person in custody of the department or substantially
prejudice or prevent the carrying out of the functions of the department, if the public
interest in confidentiality clearly outweighs the public interest in disclosure.
(6) Records, reports and other information received or compiled by the Director of
the Department of Consumer and Business Services in the administration of ORS
chapters 723 and 725 not otherwise required by law to be made public, to the extent that
the interests of lending institutions, their officers, employees and customers in
preserving the confidentiality of such information outweighs the public interest in
disclosure.
(7) Reports made to or filed with the court under ORS 137.077 or 137.530.
(8) Any public records or information the disclosure of which is prohibited by federal
law or regulations.
(9)(a) Public records or information the disclosure of which is prohibited or restricted
or otherwise made confidential or privileged under Oregon law.
(b) Subject to ORS 192.360, paragraph (a) of this subsection does not apply to factual
information compiled in a public record when:

(A) The basis for the claim of exemption is ORS 40.225;
(B) The factual information is not prohibited from disclosure under any applicable
state or federal law, regulation or court order and is not otherwise exempt from
disclosure under ORS 192.311 to 192.478;
(C) The factual information was compiled by or at the direction of an attorney as part
of an investigation on behalf of the public body in response to information of possible
wrongdoing by the public body;
(D) The factual information was not compiled in preparation for litigation, arbitration
or an administrative proceeding that was reasonably likely to be initiated or that has
been initiated by or against the public body; and
(E) The holder of the privilege under ORS 40.225 has made or authorized a public
statement characterizing or partially disclosing the factual information compiled by or at
the attorney’s direction.
(10) Public records or information described in this section, furnished by the public
body originally compiling, preparing or receiving them to any other public officer or
public body in connection with performance of the duties of the recipient, if the
considerations originally giving rise to the confidential or exempt nature of the public
records or information remain applicable.
(11) Records of the Energy Facility Siting Council concerning the review or approval
of security programs pursuant to ORS 469.530.
(12) Employee and retiree address, telephone number and other nonfinancial
membership records and employee financial records maintained by the Public
Employees Retirement System pursuant to ORS chapters 238 and 238A or by another
retirement system operated by a public body.
(13) Records of or submitted to the State Treasurer, the Oregon Investment Council
or the agents of the treasurer or the council relating to active or proposed publicly traded
investments under ORS chapter 293, including but not limited to records regarding the
acquisition, exchange or liquidation of the investments. For the purposes of this
subsection:
(a) The exemption does not apply to:
(A) Information in investment records solely related to the amount paid directly into
an investment by, or returned from the investment directly to, the treasurer or council; or
(B) The identity of the entity to which the amount was paid directly or from which
the amount was received directly.
(b) An investment in a publicly traded investment is no longer active when
acquisition, exchange or liquidation of the investment has been concluded.

(14)(a) Records of or submitted to the State Treasurer, the Oregon Investment
Council, the Oregon Growth Board or the agents of the treasurer, council or board
relating to actual or proposed investments under ORS chapter 293 or 348 in a privately
placed investment fund or a private asset including but not limited to records regarding
the solicitation, acquisition, deployment, exchange or liquidation of the investments
including but not limited to:
(A) Due diligence materials that are proprietary to an investment fund, to an asset
ownership or to their respective investment vehicles.
(B) Financial statements of an investment fund, an asset ownership or their respective
investment vehicles.
(C) Meeting materials of an investment fund, an asset ownership or their respective
investment vehicles.
(D) Records containing information regarding the portfolio positions in which an
investment fund, an asset ownership or their respective investment vehicles invest.
(E) Capital call and distribution notices of an investment fund, an asset ownership or
their respective investment vehicles.
(F) Investment agreements and related documents.
(b) The exemption under this subsection does not apply to:
(A) The name, address and vintage year of each privately placed investment fund.
(B) The dollar amount of the commitment made to each privately placed investment
fund since inception of the fund.
(C) The dollar amount of cash contributions made to each privately placed
investment fund since inception of the fund.
(D) The dollar amount, on a fiscal year-end basis, of cash distributions received by
the State Treasurer, the Oregon Investment Council, the Oregon Growth Board or the
agents of the treasurer, council or board from each privately placed investment fund.
(E) The dollar amount, on a fiscal year-end basis, of the remaining value of assets in
a privately placed investment fund attributable to an investment by the State Treasurer,
the Oregon Investment Council, the Oregon Growth Board or the agents of the treasurer,
council or board.
(F) The net internal rate of return of each privately placed investment fund since
inception of the fund.
(G) The investment multiple of each privately placed investment fund since inception
of the fund.
(H) The dollar amount of the total management fees and costs paid on an annual
fiscal year-end basis to each privately placed investment fund.

(I) The dollar amount of cash profit received from each privately placed investment
fund on a fiscal year-end basis.
(15) The monthly reports prepared and submitted under ORS 293.761 and 293.766
concerning the Public Employees Retirement Fund and the Industrial Accident Fund
may be uniformly treated as exempt from disclosure for a period of up to 90 days after
the end of the calendar quarter.
(16) Reports of unclaimed property filed by the holders of such property to the extent
permitted by ORS 98.352.
(17)(a) The following records, communications and supporting information
submitted to the Oregon Business Development Commission, the Oregon Business
Development Department, the State Department of Agriculture, the Oregon Growth
Board, the Port of Portland or other ports as defined in ORS 777.005, or a county or city
governing body and any board, department, commission, council or agency of a county
or city, by applicants as part of an application for investment funds, grants, loans,
services or economic development moneys, support or assistance including, but not
limited to, those described in ORS 285A.224:
(A) Financial statements.
(B) Customer lists.
(C) Information pertaining to litigation to which the applicant or a proposed
beneficiary of the application is a party if the complaint has been filed, or if the
complaint has not been filed, if the applicant shows that such litigation is reasonably
likely to occur. This exemption does not apply to litigation which has been concluded,
and nothing in this subparagraph shall limit any right or opportunity granted by
discovery or deposition statutes to a party to litigation or potential litigation.
(D) Production, sales and cost data.
(E) Marketing strategy information that relates to the applicant’s plan or a proposed
beneficiary of the application to address specific markets and strategy regarding specific
competitors.
(b) The following records, communications and information submitted to the State
Department of Energy by applicants for tax credits or for grants awarded under ORS
469B.256:
(A) Personal financial statements.
(B) Financial statements of applicants.
(C) Customer lists.
(D) Information of an applicant pertaining to litigation to which the applicant is a
party if the complaint has been filed, or if the complaint has not been filed, if the

applicant shows that such litigation is reasonably likely to occur; this exemption does
not apply to litigation which has been concluded, and nothing in this subparagraph shall
limit any right or opportunity granted by discovery or deposition statutes to a party to
litigation or potential litigation.
(E) Production, sales and cost data.
(F) Marketing strategy information that relates to applicant’s plan to address specific
markets and applicant’s strategy regarding specific competitors.
(18) Records, reports or returns submitted by private concerns or enterprises required
by law to be submitted to or inspected by a governmental body to allow it to determine
the amount of any transient lodging tax payable and the amounts of such tax payable or
paid, to the extent that such information is in a form which would permit identification
of the individual concern or enterprise. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the use
which can be made of such information for regulatory purposes or its admissibility in
any enforcement proceedings. The public body shall notify the taxpayer of the
delinquency immediately by certified mail. However, in the event that the payment or
delivery of transient lodging taxes otherwise due to a public body is delinquent by over
60 days, the public body shall disclose, upon the request of any person, the following
information:
(a) The identity of the individual concern or enterprise that is delinquent over 60 days
in the payment or delivery of the taxes.
(b) The period for which the taxes are delinquent.
(c) The actual, or estimated, amount of the delinquency.
(19) All information supplied by a person under ORS 151.485 for the purpose of
requesting appointed counsel, and all information supplied to the court from whatever
source for the purpose of verifying the financial eligibility of a person pursuant to ORS
151.485.
(20) Workers’ compensation claim records of the Department of Consumer and
Business Services, except in accordance with rules adopted by the Director of the
Department of Consumer and Business Services, in any of the following circumstances:
(a) When necessary for insurers, self-insured employers and third party claim
administrators to process workers’ compensation claims.
(b) When necessary for the director, other governmental agencies of this state or the
United States to carry out their duties, functions or powers.
(c) When the disclosure is made in such a manner that the disclosed information
cannot be used to identify any worker who is the subject of a claim.

(d) When a worker or the worker’s representative requests review of the worker’s
claim record.
(21) Sensitive business records or financial or commercial information of the Oregon
Health and Science University that is not customarily provided to business competitors.
(22) Records of Oregon Health and Science University regarding candidates for the
position of president of the university.
(23) The records of a library, including:
(a) Circulation records, showing use of specific library material by a named person;
(b) The name of a library patron together with the address or telephone number of the
patron; and
(c) The electronic mail address of a patron.
(24) The following records, communications and information obtained by the
Housing and Community Services Department in connection with the department’s
monitoring or administration of financial assistance or of housing or other
developments:
(a) Personal and corporate financial statements and information, including tax
returns.
(b) Credit reports.
(c) Project appraisals, excluding appraisals obtained in the course of transactions
involving an interest in real estate that is acquired, leased, rented, exchanged, transferred
or otherwise disposed of as part of the project, but only after the transactions have closed
and are concluded.
(d) Market studies and analyses.
(e) Articles of incorporation, partnership agreements and operating agreements.
(f) Commitment letters.
(g) Project pro forma statements.
(h) Project cost certifications and cost data.
(i) Audits.
(j) Project tenant correspondence.
(k) Personal information about a tenant.
(L) Housing assistance payments.
(25) Raster geographic information system (GIS) digital databases, provided by
private forestland owners or their representatives, voluntarily and in confidence to the
State Forestry Department, that is not otherwise required by law to be submitted.
(26) Sensitive business, commercial or financial information furnished to or
developed by a public body engaged in the business of providing electricity or electricity

services, if the information is directly related to a transaction described in ORS 261.348,
or if the information is directly related to a bid, proposal or negotiations for the sale or
purchase of electricity or electricity services, and disclosure of the information would
cause a competitive disadvantage for the public body or its retail electricity customers.
This subsection does not apply to cost-of-service studies used in the development or
review of generally applicable rate schedules.
(27) Sensitive business, commercial or financial information furnished to or
developed by the City of Klamath Falls, acting solely in connection with the ownership
and operation of the Klamath Cogeneration Project, if the information is directly related
to a transaction described in ORS 225.085 and disclosure of the information would
cause a competitive disadvantage for the Klamath Cogeneration Project. This subsection
does not apply to cost-of-service studies used in the development or review of generally
applicable rate schedules.
(28) Personally identifiable information about customers of a municipal electric
utility or a people’s utility district or the names, dates of birth, driver license numbers,
telephone numbers, electronic mail addresses or Social Security numbers of customers
who receive water, sewer or storm drain services from a public body as defined in ORS
174.109. The utility or district may release personally identifiable information about a
customer, and a public body providing water, sewer or storm drain services may release
the name, date of birth, driver license number, telephone number, electronic mail address
or Social Security number of a customer, if the customer consents in writing or
electronically, if the disclosure is necessary for the utility, district or other public body to
render services to the customer, if the disclosure is required pursuant to a court order or
if the disclosure is otherwise required by federal or state law. The utility, district or other
public body may charge as appropriate for the costs of providing such information. The
utility, district or other public body may make customer records available to third party
credit agencies on a regular basis in connection with the establishment and management
of customer accounts or in the event such accounts are delinquent.
(29) A record of the street and number of an employee’s address submitted to a
special district to obtain assistance in promoting an alternative to single occupant motor
vehicle transportation.
(30) Sensitive business records, capital development plans or financial or commercial
information of Oregon Corrections Enterprises that is not customarily provided to
business competitors.
(31) Documents, materials or other information submitted to the Director of the
Department of Consumer and Business Services in confidence by a state, federal,

foreign or international regulatory or law enforcement agency or by the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners, its affiliates or subsidiaries under ORS
86A.095 to 86A.198, 697.005 to 697.095, 697.602 to 697.842, 705.137, 717.200 to
717.320, 717.900 or 717.905, ORS chapter 59, 723, 725 or 726, the Bank Act or the
Insurance Code when:
(a) The document, material or other information is received upon notice or with an
understanding that it is confidential or privileged under the laws of the jurisdiction that
is the source of the document, material or other information; and
(b) The director has obligated the Department of Consumer and Business Services
not to disclose the document, material or other information.
(32) A county elections security plan developed and filed under ORS 254.074.
(33) Information about review or approval of programs relating to the security of:
(a) Generation, storage or conveyance of:
(A) Electricity;
(B) Gas in liquefied or gaseous form;
(C) Hazardous substances as defined in ORS 453.005 (7)(a), (b) and (d);
(D) Petroleum products;
(E) Sewage; or
(F) Water.
(b) Telecommunication systems, including cellular, wireless or radio systems.
(c) Data transmissions by whatever means provided.
(34) The information specified in ORS 25.020 (8) if the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court designates the information as confidential by rule under ORS 1.002.
(35)(a) Employer account records of the State Accident Insurance Fund Corporation.
(b) As used in this subsection, “employer account records” means all records
maintained in any form that are specifically related to the account of any employer
insured, previously insured or under consideration to be insured by the State Accident
Insurance Fund Corporation and any information obtained or developed by the
corporation in connection with providing, offering to provide or declining to provide
insurance to a specific employer. “Employer account records” includes, but is not
limited to, an employer’s payroll records, premium payment history, payroll
classifications, employee names and identification information, experience modification
factors, loss experience and dividend payment history.
(c) The exemption provided by this subsection may not serve as the basis for
opposition to the discovery documents in litigation pursuant to applicable rules of civil
procedure.

(36)(a) Claimant files of the State Accident Insurance Fund Corporation.
(b) As used in this subsection, “claimant files” includes, but is not limited to, all
records held by the corporation pertaining to a person who has made a claim, as defined
in ORS 656.005, and all records pertaining to such a claim.
(c) The exemption provided by this subsection may not serve as the basis for
opposition to the discovery documents in litigation pursuant to applicable rules of civil
procedure.
(37) Except as authorized by ORS 408.425, records that certify or verify an
individual’s discharge or other separation from military service.
(38) Records of or submitted to a domestic violence service or resource center that
relate to the name or personal information of an individual who visits a center for
service, including the date of service, the type of service received, referrals or contact
information or personal information of a family member of the individual. As used in
this subsection, “domestic violence service or resource center” means an entity, the
primary purpose of which is to assist persons affected by domestic or sexual violence by
providing referrals, resource information or other assistance specifically of benefit to
domestic or sexual violence victims.
(39) Information reported to the Oregon Health Authority under ORS 431A.860,
except as provided in ORS 431A.865 (3)(b), information disclosed by the authority
under ORS 431A.865 and any information related to disclosures made by the authority
under ORS 431A.865, including information identifying the recipient of the information.
(40)(a) Electronic mail addresses in the possession or custody of an agency or
subdivision of the executive department, as defined in ORS 174.112, the legislative
department, as defined in ORS 174.114, a local government or local service district, as
defined in ORS 174.116, or a special government body, as defined in ORS 174.117.
(b) This subsection does not apply to electronic mail addresses assigned by a public
body to public employees for use by the employees in the ordinary course of their
employment.
(c) This subsection and ORS 244.040 do not prohibit the campaign office of the
current officeholder or current candidates who have filed to run for that elective office
from receiving upon request the electronic mail addresses used by the current
officeholder’s legislative office for newsletter distribution, except that a campaign office
that receives electronic mail addresses under this paragraph may not make a further
disclosure of those electronic mail addresses to any other person.
(41) Residential addresses, residential telephone numbers, personal cellular telephone
numbers, personal electronic mail addresses, driver license numbers, emergency contact

information, Social Security numbers, dates of birth and other telephone numbers of
individuals currently or previously certified or licensed by the Department of Public
Safety Standards and Training contained in the records maintained by the department.
(42) Personally identifiable information and contact information of veterans as
defined in ORS 408.225 and of persons serving on active duty or as reserve members
with the Armed Forces of the United States, National Guard or other reserve component
that was obtained by the Department of Veterans’ Affairs in the course of performing its
duties and functions, including but not limited to names, residential and employment
addresses, dates of birth, driver license numbers, telephone numbers, electronic mail
addresses, Social Security numbers, marital status, dependents, the character of
discharge from military service, military rating or rank, that the person is a veteran or
has provided military service, information relating to an application for or receipt of
federal or state benefits, information relating to the basis for receipt or denial of federal
or state benefits and information relating to a home loan or grant application, including
but not limited to financial information provided in connection with the application.
(43) Business, commercial, financial, operational and research data and information,
including but not limited to pricing, intellectual property and customer records,
furnished to, developed by or generated in connection with the ownership and operation
of an unmanned aerial system test range, if disclosure of the information would cause a
competitive disadvantage to the test range or its users.
(44) Personally identifiable information about a child under the age of 16 years that is
submitted to the State Fish and Wildlife Commission or an agent of the commission to
obtain a license, tag or permit under the wildlife laws.
(45) Proprietary information subject to a nondisclosure agreement that is provided to
the Oregon Broadband Office pursuant to ORS 285A.176.
(46) With respect to records held by the State Treasurer relating to unclaimed
properties under ORS 98.302 to 98.436:
(a) All materials or communications received during an examination under ORS
98.412 (2) and (3), except to the extent that the information in the materials or
communications appears within a report under ORS 98.412 (4) or 98.352 and the
information is not otherwise exempt under ORS 98.352 (4).
(b) All materials or communications assembled or used by the state or its auditor
during the preparation of a report under ORS 98.412 (4), including drafts,
correspondence, working papers and other preparatory documents.

(c) Information obtained during an examination under ORS 98.412 (2) and (3)
concerning an unclaimed property holder’s potential liability in a state other than
Oregon, even if that information is included in a report under ORS 98.412 (4) or 98.352.
(d) Information in or supporting claims to unclaimed property under ORS 98.392,
except to the extent that the claimant consents to the information’s disclosure.
(47) Any document, record or plan for protection relating to the existence, nature,
location or function of cybersecurity devices, programs or systems designed to protect
computer, information technology or communications systems against threat or attack,
including but not limited to:
(a) Records pertaining to devices, programs or systems that depend for their
effectiveness in whole or part upon a lack of public knowledge; and
(b) Contractual records or insurance records that set forth cybersecurity
specifications, insurance application and coverage details.
(48) Sensitive business, commercial or financial information, that is not customarily
provided to business competitors, that is furnished to or developed by the Oregon
Prescription Drug Program in connection with purchasing prescription drugs or
contracting for the services of a pharmacy benefit manager or pharmacy networks
pursuant to ORS 414.312. [Formerly 192.502; 2019 c.470 §10; 2021 c.174 §1; 2021
c.657 §1; 2022 c.60 §5; 2023 c.50 §1; 2023 c.238 §8; 2023 c.307 §1; 2024 c.87 §13;
2025 c.565 §1]
Note: See note under 192.338.
192.360 Condensation of public record subject to disclosure; petition to review
denial of right to inspect public record; adequacy of condensation. (1) When a
public record is subject to disclosure under ORS 192.355 (9)(b), in lieu of making the
public record available for inspection by providing a copy of the record, the public body
may prepare and release a condensation from the record of the significant facts that are
not otherwise exempt from disclosure under ORS 192.311 to 192.478. The release of the
condensation does not waive any privilege under ORS 40.225 to 40.295.
(2) The person seeking to inspect or receive a copy of any public record for which a
condensation of facts has been provided under this section may petition for review of the
denial to inspect or receive a copy of the records under ORS 192.311 to 192.478. In such
a review, the Attorney General, district attorney or court shall, in addition to reviewing
the records to which access was denied, compare those records to the condensation to
determine whether the condensation adequately describes the significant facts contained
in the records. [Formerly 192.423]

Note: 192.360 was added to and made a part of 192.311 to 192.478 by legislative
action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised
Statutes for further explanation.
(Records Containing Personal Information)
192.363 Contents of certain requests for disclosure. (1) A request for the disclosure
of records described in ORS 192.355 (3) or 192.365 must include the following
information:
(a) The names of the individuals for whom personal information is sought;
(b) A statement describing the personal information being sought; and
(c) A statement that satisfies subsection (2) of this section.
(2) The party seeking disclosure shall show by clear and convincing evidence that the
public interest requires disclosure in a particular instance.
(3) Upon receiving a request described in subsection (1) of this section, a public body
shall forward a copy of the request and any materials submitted with the request to the
individuals whose personal information is being sought or to any representatives of each
class of persons whose personal information is the subject of the request.
(4) For purposes of subsection (3) of this section, the public body has sole discretion
to determine the classes of persons whose personal information is the subject of the
request and to identify the representatives for each class.
(5) The public body may not disclose information pursuant to the request for at least
seven days after forwarding copies of the request under subsection (3) of this section.
(6) The public body shall consider all information submitted under this section and
shall disclose requested information only if the public body determines that the party
seeking disclosure has demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the public
interest requires disclosure in a particular instance. [Formerly 192.437]
Note: 192.363 was added to and made a part of 192.311 to 192.478 by legislative
action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised
Statutes for further explanation.
192.365 Disclosure of information pertaining to home care worker, personal
support worker, operator of child care facility, exempt child care provider or
operator of adult foster home. (1) Upon compliance with ORS 192.363, a public body
that is the custodian of or is otherwise in possession of the following information

pertaining to a home care worker or personal support worker as defined in ORS 410.600,
an operator of a child care facility as defined in ORS 329A.250, an exempt family child
care provider as defined in ORS 329A.430 or an operator of an adult foster home as
defined in ORS 443.705 shall disclose that information in response to a request to
inspect public records under ORS 192.311 to 192.478:
(a) Residential address and telephone numbers;
(b) Personal electronic mail addresses and personal cellular telephone numbers;
(c) Social Security numbers and employer-issued identification card numbers; and
(d) Emergency contact information.
(2) Subsection (1) of this section does not apply to the Judicial Department or the
Department of Transportation or to any records in the custody of the Judicial
Department or the Department of Transportation. [Formerly 192.435; 2018 c.75 §10]
Note: 192.365 was added to and made a part of 192.311 to 192.478 by legislative
action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised
Statutes for further explanation.
192.368 Nondisclosure on request of home address, home telephone number and
electronic mail address; rules of procedure; duration of effect of request; liability;
when not applicable. (1) An individual may submit a written request to a public body
not to disclose a specified public record indicating the home address, personal telephone
number or electronic mail address of the individual. A public body may not disclose the
specified public record if the individual demonstrates to the satisfaction of the public
body that the personal safety of the individual or the personal safety of a family member
residing with the individual is in danger if the home address, personal telephone number
or electronic mail address remains available for public inspection.
(2) The Attorney General shall adopt rules describing:
(a) The procedures for submitting the written request described in subsection (1) of
this section.
(b) The evidence an individual shall provide to the public body to establish that
disclosure of the home address, telephone number or electronic mail address of the
individual would constitute a danger to personal safety. The evidence may include but is
not limited to evidence that the individual or a family member residing with the
individual has:
(A) Been a victim of domestic violence;
(B) Obtained an order issued under ORS 133.055;

(C) Contacted a law enforcement officer involving domestic violence or other
physical abuse;
(D) Obtained a temporary restraining order or other no contact order to protect the
individual from future physical abuse; or
(E) Filed other criminal or civil legal proceedings regarding physical protection.
(c) The procedures for submitting the written notification from the individual that
disclosure of the home address, personal telephone number or electronic mail address of
the individual no longer constitutes a danger to personal safety.
(3) A request described in subsection (1) of this section remains effective:
(a) Until the public body receives a written request for termination but no later than
five years after the date that a public body receives the request; or
(b) In the case of a voter registration record, until the individual must update the
individual’s voter registration, at which time the individual may apply for another
exemption from disclosure.
(4) A public body may disclose a home address, personal telephone number or
electronic mail address of an individual exempt from disclosure under subsection (1) of
this section upon court order, on request from any law enforcement agency or with the
consent of the individual.
(5) A public body may not be held liable for granting or denying an exemption from
disclosure under this section or any other unauthorized release of a home address,
personal telephone number or electronic mail address granted an exemption from
disclosure under this section.
(6) This section does not apply to county property and lien records. [Formerly
192.445]
Note: 192.368 was added to and made a part of 192.311 to 192.478 by legislative
action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised
Statutes for further explanation.
192.371 Nondisclosure of public employee identification badge or card. (1) As
used in this section, “public body” has the meaning given that term in ORS 174.109.
(2) A public body may not disclose the identification badge or card of an employee of
the public body without the written consent of the employee if:
(a) The badge or card contains the photograph of the employee; and
(b) The badge or card was prepared solely for internal use by the public body to
identify employees of the public body.

(3) The public body may not disclose a duplicate of the photograph used on the
badge or card. [Formerly 192.447]
Note: 192.371 was enacted into law by the Legislative Assembly but was not added to
or made a part of ORS chapter 192 or any series therein by legislative action. See
Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.
192.374 Nondisclosure of concealed handgun license records or information;
exceptions; limitations; rules. (1) A public body may not disclose records or
information that identifies a person as a current or former holder of, or applicant for, a
concealed handgun license, unless:
(a) The disclosure is made to another public body and is necessary for criminal
justice purposes;
(b) A court enters an order in a criminal or civil case directing the public body to
disclose the records or information;
(c) The holder of, or applicant for, the concealed handgun license consents to the
disclosure in writing;
(d) The public body determines that a compelling public interest requires disclosure
in the particular instance and the disclosure is limited to the name, age and county of
residence of the holder or applicant;
(e)(A) The disclosure is limited to confirming or denying that a person convicted of a
person crime, or restrained by a protective order, is a current holder of a concealed
handgun license; and
(B) The disclosure is made to a victim of the person crime or to a person who is
protected by the protective order, in response to a request for disclosure that provides the
public body with the name and age of the person convicted of the person crime or
restrained by the protective order; or
(f)(A) The disclosure is limited to confirming or denying that a person convicted of a
crime involving the use or possession of a firearm is a current holder of a concealed
handgun license; and
(B) The disclosure is made to a bona fide representative of the news media in
response to a request for disclosure that provides the name and age of the person
convicted of the crime involving the use or possession of a firearm.
(2) A public body may not confirm or deny that a person described in subsection (1)
(e)(A) or (f)(A) of this section is a current holder of a concealed handgun license unless
the person seeking disclosure:

(a) Under subsection (1)(e) of this section provides the public body with written
proof that the person is a victim of the person crime or is protected by the protective
order.
(b) Under subsection (1)(f) of this section provides the public body with written
proof that the person is a bona fide representative of the news media.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a public body that receives a request
for disclosure under subsection (1)(e) or (f) of this section may conduct an investigation,
including a criminal records check, to determine whether a person described in
subsection (1)(e)(A) or (f)(A) of this section has been convicted of a person crime or a
crime involving the use or possession of a firearm or is restrained by a protective order.
(4) The Attorney General shall adopt rules to carry out the provisions of this section.
The rules must include a description of:
(a) The procedures for submitting the written request described in subsection (1)(d)
of this section; and
(b) The materials an individual must provide to the public body to establish a
compelling public interest that supports the disclosure of the name, age and county of
residence of the holder or applicant.
(5) The prohibition described in subsection (1) of this section does not apply to the
Judicial Department.
(6) As used in this section:
(a) “Convicted” does not include a conviction that has been reversed, vacated or set
aside or a conviction for which the person has been pardoned.
(b) “Person crime” means a person felony or person Class A misdemeanor, as those
terms are defined in the rules of the Oregon Criminal Justice Commission, or any other
crime constituting domestic violence, as defined in ORS 135.230.
(c) “Protective order” has the meaning given that term in ORS 135.886.
(d) “Victim” has the meaning given that term in ORS 131.007. [Formerly 192.448]
Note: 192.374 was added to and made a part of 192.311 to 192.478 by legislative
action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised
Statutes for further explanation.
192.377 Required redaction of certain personal information. A public body that is
the custodian of or is otherwise in possession of information that was submitted to the
public body in confidence and is not otherwise required by law to be submitted, must
redact all of the following information before making a disclosure described in ORS
192.355 (4):

(1) Residential address and telephone numbers;
(2) Personal electronic mail addresses and personal cellular telephone numbers;
(3) Social Security numbers and employer-issued identification card numbers; and
(4) Emergency contact information. [Formerly 192.504]
Note: 192.377 was added to and made a part of 192.311 to 192.478 by legislative
action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised
Statutes for further explanation.
192.380 Immunity from liability for disclosure of certain personal information;
recovery of costs. (1) A public body or any official of the public body that determines
that a party requesting information under ORS 192.355 (3), 192.363 or 192.365 has
demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the public interest requires
disclosure in a particular instance is immune from civil or criminal liability associated
with the disclosure.
(2) A public body that receives a request for disclosure of records under ORS
192.355 (3) or 192.365 is entitled to recover the cost of complying with ORS 192.363
without regard to whether the public body determines that the party requesting
disclosure has demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the public interest
requires disclosure in a particular instance. [Formerly 192.497]
Note: 192.380 was added to and made a part of 192.311 to 192.478 by legislative
action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised
Statutes for further explanation.
(Investigation Records)
192.385 Nondisclosure of certain public safety officer investigation records;
exceptions. (1) As used in this section:
(a) “Law enforcement unit” has the meaning given that term in ORS 181A.355.
(b) “Public body” has the meaning given that term in ORS 192.311.
(c) “Public safety officer” has the meaning given that term in ORS 181A.355.
(2) A public body may not disclose audio or video records of internal investigation
interviews of public safety officers.
(3) Subsection (2) of this section does not prohibit disclosure of the records described
in subsection (2) of this section to:
(a) A law enforcement unit for purposes of the investigation;

(b) An attorney representing a public safety officer who is the subject of the
investigation;
(c) The Department of Public Safety Standards and Training as required by ORS
181A.670;
(d) A district attorney, as defined in ORS 131.005;
(e) A public safety officer who is the subject of the investigation;
(f) An attorney for a defendant in a criminal proceeding related to the investigation,
for use in preparation for the criminal proceeding;
(g) A labor organization, as defined in ORS 243.650, for use in an action by an
employer against a member of the labor organization for the purpose of punishing the
member;
(h) A public body responsible for civilian oversight or a citizen review body
designated by the public body for the purposes of fulfilling the investigative and
oversight functions of the body;
(i) A federal law enforcement agency for purposes of the investigation; or
(j) The Attorney General.
(4) The disclosure of records under subsection (3) of this section does not make the
records subject to further disclosure. [Formerly 192.405]
Note: 192.385 was enacted into law by the Legislative Assembly but was not added
to or made a part of ORS chapter 192 or any series therein by legislative action. See
Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.
(Old Records)
192.390 Inspection of records more than 25 years old. Notwithstanding ORS
192.338, 192.345 and 192.355 and except as otherwise provided in ORS 192.398, public
records that are more than 25 years old shall be available for inspection. [Formerly
192.495]
Note: 192.390 was added to and made a part of 192.311 to 192.478 by legislative
action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised
Statutes for further explanation.
(Health Records)

192.395 Health services costs. A record of an agency of the executive department as
defined in ORS 174.112 that contains the following information is a public record
subject to inspection under ORS 192.314 and is not exempt from disclosure under ORS
192.345 or 192.355 except to the extent that the record discloses information about an
individual’s health or is proprietary to a person:
(1) The amounts determined by an independent actuary retained by the agency to
cover the costs of providing each of the following health services under ORS 414.591,
414.631 and 414.688 to 414.745 for the six months preceding the report:
(a) Inpatient hospital services;
(b) Outpatient hospital services;
(c) Laboratory and X-ray services;
(d) Physician and other licensed practitioner services;
(e) Prescription drugs;
(f) Dental services;
(g) Vision services;
(h) Mental health services;
(i) Chemical dependency services;
(j) Durable medical equipment and supplies; and
(k) Other health services provided under a coordinated care organization contract
under ORS 414.591 or a contract with a prepaid managed care health services
organization, as defined in ORS 414.025;
(2) The amounts the agency and each contractor have paid under each coordinated
care organization contract under ORS 414.591 or prepaid managed care health services
organization contract for administrative costs and the provision of each of the health
services described in subsection (1) of this section for the six months preceding the
report;
(3) Any adjustments made to the amounts reported under this section to account for
geographic or other differences in providing the health services; and
(4) The numbers of individuals served under each coordinated care organization
contract or prepaid managed care health services organization contract, listed by
category of individual. [Formerly 192.493]
Note: 192.395 was enacted into law by the Legislative Assembly but was not added
to or made a part of ORS chapter 192 or any series therein by legislative action. See
Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.

192.398 Medical records; sealed records; records of individual in custody or
under supervision; student records. The following public records are exempt from
disclosure:
(1) Records less than 75 years old which contain information about the physical or
mental health or psychiatric care or treatment of a living individual, if the public
disclosure thereof would constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy. The party
seeking disclosure shall have the burden of showing by clear and convincing evidence
that the public interest requires disclosure in the particular instance and that public
disclosure would not constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy.
(2) Records less than 75 years old which were sealed in compliance with statute or by
court order. Such records may be disclosed upon order of a court of competent
jurisdiction or as otherwise provided by law.
(3) Records of a person who is or has been in the custody or under the lawful
supervision of a state agency, a court or a unit of local government, are exempt from
disclosure for a period of 25 years after termination of such custody or supervision to the
extent that disclosure thereof would interfere with the rehabilitation of the person if the
public interest in confidentiality clearly outweighs the public interest in disclosure.
Nothing in this subsection, however, shall be construed as prohibiting disclosure of the
fact that a person is in custody.
(4) Student records required by state or federal law to be exempt from disclosure.
[Formerly 192.496]
Note: 192.398 was added to and made a part of 192.311 to 192.478 by legislative
action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised
Statutes for further explanation.
192.401 Records of health professional regulatory boards, Health Licensing
Office. (1)(a) A person denied the right to inspect or to receive a copy of a public record
of a health professional regulatory board, as defined in ORS 676.160, that contains
information concerning a licensee or applicant, and petitioning the Attorney General to
review the public record shall, on or before the date of filing the petition with the
Attorney General, send a copy of the petition by first class mail to the health
professional regulatory board. Not more than 48 hours after the board receives a copy of
the petition, the board shall send a copy of the petition by first class mail to the licensee
or applicant who is the subject of a public record for which disclosure is sought. When
sending a copy of the petition to the licensee or applicant, the board shall include a
notice informing the licensee or applicant that a written response by the licensee or

applicant may be filed with the Attorney General not later than seven days after the date
that the notice was sent by the board. Immediately upon receipt of any written response
from the licensee or applicant, the Attorney General shall send a copy of the response to
the petitioner by first class mail.
(b) A person denied the right to inspect or to receive a copy of a public record of the
Health Licensing Office that contains information concerning an individual who holds,
or an applicant for, an authorization to practice a profession to which ORS 676.595
applies, and petitioning the Attorney General to review the public record shall, on or
before the date of filing the petition with the Attorney General, send a copy of the
petition by first class mail to the office. Not more than 48 hours after the office receives
a copy of the petition, the office shall send a copy of the petition by first class mail to the
holder of the authorization or the applicant who is the subject of a public record for
which disclosure is sought. When sending a copy of the petition to the holder of the
authorization or the applicant, the office shall include a notice informing the holder of
the authorization or the applicant that a written response by the holder of the
authorization or the applicant may be filed with the Attorney General not later than
seven days after the date that the notice was sent by the office. Immediately upon receipt
of any written response from the holder of the authorization or the applicant, the
Attorney General shall send a copy of the response to the petitioner by first class mail.
(2)(a) The person seeking disclosure of a public record of a health professional
regulatory board, as defined in ORS 676.160, that is confidential or exempt from
disclosure under ORS 676.165 or 676.175 shall have the burden of demonstrating to the
Attorney General by clear and convincing evidence that the public interest in disclosure
outweighs other interests in nondisclosure, including but not limited to the public
interest in nondisclosure. The Attorney General shall issue an order denying or granting
the petition, or denying or granting it in part, not later than the 15th day following the
day that the Attorney General receives the petition. A copy of the Attorney General’s
order granting a petition or part of a petition shall be served by first class mail on the
health professional regulatory board, the petitioner and the licensee or applicant who is
the subject of a public record ordered to be disclosed. The health professional regulatory
board shall not disclose a public record prior to the seventh day following the service of
the Attorney General’s order on a licensee or applicant entitled to receive notice under
this paragraph.
(b) The person seeking disclosure of a public record of the Health Licensing Office
that is confidential or exempt from disclosure as described in ORS 676.595 shall have
the burden of demonstrating to the Attorney General by clear and convincing evidence

that the public interest in disclosure outweighs other interests in nondisclosure, including
but not limited to the public interest in nondisclosure. The Attorney General shall issue
an order denying or granting the petition, or denying or granting the petition in part, not
later than the 15th day following the day that the Attorney General receives the petition.
A copy of the Attorney General’s order granting a petition or part of a petition shall be
served by first class mail on the office, the petitioner and the holder of the authorization
or the applicant who is the subject of a public record ordered to be disclosed. The office
shall not disclose a public record prior to the seventh day following the service of the
Attorney General’s order on a holder of an authorization or an applicant entitled to
receive notice under this paragraph.
(3)(a) If the Attorney General grants or denies the petition for a public record of a
health professional regulatory board, as defined in ORS 676.160, that contains
information concerning a licensee or applicant, the board, a person denied the right to
inspect or receive a copy of the public record or the licensee or applicant who is the
subject of the public record may institute proceedings for injunctive or declaratory relief
in the circuit court for the county where the public record is held. The party seeking
disclosure of the public record shall have the burden of demonstrating by clear and
convincing evidence that the public interest in disclosure outweighs other interests in
nondisclosure, including but not limited to the public interest in nondisclosure.
(b) If the Attorney General grants or denies the petition for a public record of the
Health Licensing Office that contains information concerning a holder of an
authorization to practice a profession or an applicant, the office, a person denied the
right to inspect or receive a copy of the public record or the holder of the authorization
or the applicant who is the subject of the public record may institute proceedings for
injunctive or declaratory relief in the circuit court for the county where the public record
is held. The party seeking disclosure of the public record shall have the burden of
demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the public interest in disclosure
outweighs other interests in nondisclosure, including but not limited to the public
interest in nondisclosure.
(4) The Attorney General may comply with a request of a health professional
regulatory board or the Health Licensing Office to be represented by independent
counsel in any proceeding under subsection (3) of this section. [Formerly subsections (4)
to (7) of 192.450]
192.405 [2011 c.485 §1; renumbered 192.385 in 2017]
(Appeals)

192.407 When petition for review of public records request allowed; order
granting petition; penalty. (1) A person who has submitted a written public records
request in compliance with a public body’s policy may seek review of the following, in
the same manner as a person petitions when inspection of a public record is denied
under ORS 192.311 to 192.478:
(a) The failure of a public body to provide the response required by ORS 192.329
within the prescribed period. A failure of the public body to timely respond shall be
treated as a denial of the request unless the public body demonstrates that compliance
was not required under ORS 192.329.
(b) An estimate of time provided by a public body pursuant to ORS 192.329, if the
person believes that the estimated time frame for the response is unreasonably long and
will result in undue delay of disclosure.
(c) Any other instance in which the person believes that the public body has failed to
comply with ORS 192.329.
(2) Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, the Attorney General, the
district attorney and the court have the same authority with respect to petitions under this
section as when inspection of a public record is denied.
(3) If the Attorney General, the district attorney or a court grants a petition filed
under this section, the order granting the petition:
(a) May require disclosure of nonexempt material responsive to the request within
seven days, or within any other period that the Attorney General, district attorney or
court concludes is appropriate to comply with ORS 192.329;
(b) May require the public body to pay a penalty of $200 to the requester if the
Attorney General, district attorney or court determines that the public body responded to
the request with undue delay or failed to respond to the request; and
(c) May order a fee waiver or a fee reduction if a public body has responded to the
request with undue delay or has failed to respond to the request in the time and manner
prescribed in ORS 192.329. Nothing in this subsection prohibits a reviewing body from
finding an unreasonable denial of a fee waiver or a fee reduction on other grounds.
(4) Nothing in this section limits the authority of a court to act under ORS 192.431.
[2017 c.456 §5; 2019 c.205 §1]
Note: 192.407 was added to and made a part of 192.311 to 192.478 by legislative
action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised
Statutes for further explanation.

192.410 [1973 c.794 §2; 1989 c.377 §1; 1993 c.787 §4; 2001 c.237 §1; 2005 c.659
§4; 2017 c.456 §2; renumbered 192.311 in 2017]
192.411 Petition to review denial of right to inspect state public record; appeal
from decision of Attorney General denying inspection. (1) Subject to ORS 192.401
(1) and 192.427, any person denied the right to inspect or to receive a copy of any public
record of a state agency may petition the Attorney General to review the public record to
determine if it may be withheld from public inspection. Except as provided in ORS
192.401 (2), the burden is on the agency to sustain its action. Except as provided in ORS
192.401 (2), the Attorney General shall issue an order denying or granting the petition,
or denying it in part and granting it in part, within seven days from the day the Attorney
General receives the petition.
(2) If the Attorney General grants the petition and orders the state agency to disclose
the public record, or if the Attorney General grants the petition in part and orders the
state agency to disclose a portion of the public record, the state agency shall comply
with the order in full within seven days after issuance of the order, unless within the
seven-day period it issues a notice of its intention to institute proceedings for injunctive
or declaratory relief in the Circuit Court for Marion County or, as provided in ORS
192.401 (3), in the circuit court of the county where the public record is held. Copies of
the notice shall be sent to the Attorney General and by certified mail to the petitioner at
the address shown on the petition. The state agency shall institute the proceedings within
seven days after it issues its notice of intention to do so. If the Attorney General denies
the petition in whole or in part, or if the state agency continues to withhold the public
record or a part of it notwithstanding an order to disclose by the Attorney General, the
person seeking disclosure may institute such proceedings.
(3) The Attorney General shall serve as counsel for the state agency in a suit filed
under subsection (2) of this section if the suit arises out of a determination by the
Attorney General that the public record should not be disclosed, or that a part of the
public record should not be disclosed if the state agency has fully complied with the
order of the Attorney General requiring disclosure of another part or parts of the public
record, and in no other case. In any case in which the Attorney General is prohibited
from serving as counsel for the state agency, the agency may retain special counsel.
[Formerly subsections (1) to (3) of 192.450]
192.415 Procedure to review denial of right to inspect other public records;
effect of disclosure. (1) ORS 192.401 and 192.411 apply to the case of a person denied

the right to inspect or to receive a copy of any public record of a public body other than
a state agency, except that:
(a) The district attorney of the county in which the public body is located, or if it is
located in more than one county the district attorney of the county in which the
administrative offices of the public body are located, shall carry out the functions of the
Attorney General;
(b) Any suit filed must be filed in the circuit court for the county described in
paragraph (a) of this subsection; and
(c) The district attorney may not serve as counsel for the public body, in the cases
permitted under ORS 192.411 (3), unless the district attorney ordinarily serves as
counsel for the public body.
(2) Disclosure of a record to the district attorney in compliance with subsection (1) of
this section does not waive any privilege or claim of privilege regarding the record or its
contents.
(3) Disclosure of a record or part of a record as ordered by the district attorney is a
compelled disclosure for purposes of ORS 40.285. [Formerly 192.460]
192.418 Effect of failure of Attorney General, district attorney or elected official
to take timely action on inspection petition. (1) The failure of the Attorney General or
district attorney to issue an order under ORS 192.401, 192.411 or 192.415 denying,
granting, or denying in part and granting in part a petition to require disclosure within
seven days from the day of receipt of the petition shall be treated as an order denying the
petition for the purpose of determining whether a person may institute proceedings for
injunctive or declaratory relief under ORS 192.401, 192.411 or 192.415.
(2) The failure of an elected official to deny, grant, or deny in part and grant in part a
request to inspect or receive a copy of a public record within seven days from the day of
receipt of the request shall be treated as a denial of the request for the purpose of
determining whether a person may institute proceedings for injunctive or declaratory
relief under ORS 192.401, 192.411 or 192.415. [Formerly 192.465]
192.420 [1973 c.794 §3; 1999 c.574 §1; 2003 c.403 §1; renumbered 192.314 in
2017]
192.422 Petition form; procedure when petition received. (1) A petition to the
Attorney General or district attorney requesting the Attorney General or district attorney
to order a public record to be made available for inspection or to be produced shall be in
substantially the following form, or in a form containing the same information:

_______________________________________________________________________
_______
______
(Date)
I (we), ____________ (name(s)), the undersigned, request the Attorney General (or
District Attorney of ______ County) to order ______ (name of governmental body) and
its employees to (make available for inspection) (produce a copy or copies of) the
following records:
1. ____________________
(Name or description of record)
2. ____________________
(Name or description of record)
I (we) asked to inspect and/or copy these records on ______ (date) at ______
(address). The request was denied by the following person(s):
1. ____________________
(Name of public officer or employee;
title or position, if known)
2. ____________________
(Name of public officer or employee;
title or position, if known)
______________________
(Signature(s))
_______________________________________________________________________
_______
This form should be delivered or mailed to the Attorney General’s office in Salem, or the
district attorney’s office in the county courthouse.

(2) Promptly upon receipt of such a petition, the Attorney General or district attorney
shall notify the public body involved. The public body shall thereupon transmit the
public record disclosure of which is sought, or a copy, to the Attorney General, together
with a statement of its reasons for believing that the public record should not be
disclosed. In an appropriate case, with the consent of the Attorney General, the public
body may instead disclose the nature or substance of the public record to the Attorney
General. [Formerly 192.470]
192.423 [2007 c.513 §2; renumbered 192.360 in 2017]
192.427 Procedure to review denial by elected official of right to inspect public
records. In any case in which a person is denied the right to inspect or to receive a copy
of a public record in the custody of an elected official, or in the custody of any other
person but as to which an elected official claims the right to withhold disclosure, no
petition to require disclosure may be filed with the Attorney General or district attorney,
or if a petition is filed it shall not be considered by the Attorney General or district
attorney after a claim of right to withhold disclosure by an elected official. In such case a
person denied the right to inspect or to receive a copy of a public record may institute
proceedings for injunctive or declaratory relief in the appropriate circuit court, as
specified in ORS 192.401, 192.411 or 192.415, and the Attorney General or district
attorney may upon request serve or decline to serve, in the discretion of the Attorney
General or district attorney, as counsel in such suit for an elected official for which the
Attorney General or district attorney ordinarily serves as counsel. Nothing in this section
shall preclude an elected official from requesting advice from the Attorney General or a
district attorney as to whether a public record should be disclosed. [Formerly 192.480]
192.430 [1973 c.794 §4; 1989 c.546 §1; renumbered 192.318 in 2017]
192.431 Court authority in reviewing action denying right to inspect public
records; docketing; costs and attorney fees. (1) In any suit filed under ORS 192.401,
192.411, 192.415, 192.422 or 192.427, the court has jurisdiction to enjoin the public
body from withholding records and to order the production of any records improperly
withheld from the person seeking disclosure. The court shall determine the matter de
novo and the burden is on the public body to sustain its action. The court, on its own
motion, may view the documents in controversy in camera before reaching a decision.
Any noncompliance with the order of the court may be punished as contempt of court.

(2) Except as to causes the court considers of greater importance, proceedings arising
under ORS 192.401, 192.411, 192.415, 192.422 or 192.427 take precedence on the
docket over all other causes and shall be assigned for hearing and trial at the earliest
practicable date and expedited in every way.
(3) If a person seeking the right to inspect or to receive a copy of a public record
prevails in the suit, the person shall be awarded costs and disbursements and reasonable
attorney fees at trial and on appeal. If the person prevails in part, the court may in its
discretion award the person costs and disbursements and reasonable attorney fees at trial
and on appeal, or an appropriate portion thereof. If the state agency failed to comply
with the Attorney General’s order in full and did not issue a notice of intention to
institute proceedings pursuant to ORS 192.411 (2) within seven days after issuance of
the order, or did not institute the proceedings within seven days after issuance of the
notice, the petitioner shall be awarded costs of suit at the trial level and reasonable
attorney fees regardless of which party instituted the suit and regardless of which party
prevailed therein. [Formerly 192.490]
192.435 [2015 c.26 §3; 2015 c.805 §2; renumbered 192.365 in 2017]
192.437 [2015 c.805 §3; renumbered 192.363 in 2017]
192.440 [1973 c.794 §5; 1979 c.548 §4; 1989 c.111 §12; 1989 c.377 §2; 1989 c.546
§2; 1999 c.824 §5; 2001 c.445 §168; 2005 c.272 §1; 2007 c.467 §1; 2017 c.456 §3;
renumbered 192.324 in 2017]
192.445 [1993 c.787 §5; 1995 c.742 §12; 2003 c.807 §1; renumbered 192.368 in
2017]
192.447 [2003 c.282 §1; renumbered 192.371 in 2017]
192.448 [2012 c.93 §2; 2012 c.93 §5; renumbered 192.374 in 2017]
192.450 [1973 c.794 §6; 1975 c.308 §2; 1997 c.791 §8; 1999 c.751 §4; 2017 c.101
§4; subsections (1) to (3) renumbered 192.411 and subsections (4) to (7) renumbered
192.401 in 2017]
192.460 [1973 c.794 §7; 2007 c.513 §4; renumbered 192.415 in 2017]
PUBLIC RECORDS ADVOCATE

192.461 Public Records Advocate. (1) The office of the Public Records Advocate is
created as an independent office within the executive department, separate and distinct
from any other state agency.
(2) The Public Records Advocate shall be appointed by the Public Records Advisory
Council under ORS 192.481.
(3) The Public Records Advocate shall be a licensee in good standing of the Oregon
State Bar.
(4) The term of office of the Public Records Advocate shall be four years, except that
the advocate may be removed for cause by the Public Records Advisory Council. A
determination to remove for cause may be appealed as a contested case proceeding
under ORS chapter 183.
(5) The advocate may be reappointed to consecutive terms.
(6) The Public Records Advocate is in the exempt service.
(7)(a) The Public Records Advocate shall select, appoint and fix the compensation of
a Deputy Public Records Advocate. The Deputy Public Records Advocate shall be a
licensee in good standing of the Oregon State Bar.
(b) The Public Records Advocate may delegate to the Deputy Public Records
Advocate any authority, power or duty to act possessed by the Public Records Advocate
except the power to delegate set forth in this paragraph.
(c) If the position of the Public Records Advocate becomes vacant, the Deputy Public
Records Advocate shall serve as the acting Public Records Advocate until a new Public
Records Advocate has been appointed.
(8)(a) The Public Records Advocate may hire and fix the compensation of other
professional staff to assist in performing the duties assigned to the Public Records
Advocate.
(b) Officers and employees of the office of the Public Records Advocate are in the
exempt service.
(9) The Public Records Advocate may seek out office facilities and administrative
support from other state agencies or local public bodies. State agencies shall assist the
advocate. Local public bodies may assist the advocate. [2017 c.728 §1; 2017 c.728 §16;
2019 c.107 §1; 2021 c.582 §1; 2025 c.32 §97]
192.464 Facilitated dispute resolution services of Public Records Advocate. (1)(a)
The Public Records Advocate shall provide facilitated dispute resolution services when
requested by a person described in subsection (2) of this section or by a state agency
under the conditions described in subsection (3) of this section.

(b) The Public Records Advocate may provide facilitated dispute resolution services
when requested by a person described in subsection (6) of this section and a city.
(2) A person may seek facilitated dispute resolution services under this section when
seeking to inspect or receive copies of public records from a state agency and the
person:
(a) Has been denied access to all or a portion of the records being sought;
(b) Has been denied a fee waiver or reduction in fees after asserting under ORS
192.324 (5) that a fee waiver or reduction of fees is in the public interest; or
(c) Received a written fee estimate under ORS 192.324 (4) that the person believes
exceeds the actual cost to be incurred by the public body in producing the requested
records.
(3)(a) A state agency may seek facilitated dispute resolution services under this
section if, in response to a request for public records, the agency asserts:
(A) That the records being sought are not public records;
(B) That the records being sought are exempt from mandatory disclosure; or
(C) That the agency is, under ORS 192.324, entitled to the fees the agency is seeking
in order to produce the records being requested.
(b) A person seeking to inspect or receive copies of public records may opt out of
facilitated dispute resolution services being sought by a state agency by giving written
notice of the requester’s election within five days of the requester’s receipt of the
agency’s request for facilitated dispute resolution. If written notice is given under this
paragraph, the state agency may not determine under subsection (4)(a) of this section
that the person seeking to inspect or receive copies of public records has failed to engage
in good faith in the facilitated dispute resolution process.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of ORS 192.311 to 192.478:
(a) The failure of a person seeking to inspect or receive copies of public records to
engage in good faith in the facilitated dispute resolution process described in this section
upon being authorized to do so under subsection (2) of this section shall be grounds for
the state agency to deny the request and refuse to disclose the requested records.
(b) The failure of a state agency to engage in good faith in the facilitated dispute
resolution process described in this section after a public records requester seeks
facilitated dispute resolution services under subsection (2) of this section shall be
grounds for the award of costs and attorney fees to the public records requester for all
costs and attorney fees incurred in pursuing the request after a good faith determination
under subsection (5) of this section.

(5)(a) Either party to the facilitated dispute resolution may request that the Public
Records Advocate make a determination concerning whether a party is acting in good
faith for purposes of applying the remedies described in subsection (4) of this section.
(b) A determination by the advocate that a party failed to engage in good faith
facilitated dispute resolution and an award of costs and attorney fees are subject to
review by the Circuit Court of Marion County as a proceeding under ORS 183.484.
(6) In the case of a person seeking to inspect or obtain copies of public records from
a city, either the person seeking records or the city may seek facilitated dispute
resolution services under this section, but only if both the person seeking records and the
city agree to have the Public Records Advocate facilitate resolution of the dispute and
the advocate consents to facilitated resolution of the dispute. A dispute described in this
subsection is not subject to subsections (4) and (5) of this section.
(7) Facilitated dispute resolution shall be requested by submitting a written request
for facilitated dispute resolution and such other information as may be required by the
Public Records Advocate. Facilitated dispute resolution between parties shall be
conducted and completed within 21 days following receipt by the advocate of the
request for facilitated dispute resolution. The facilitated dispute resolution period may be
extended by unanimous agreement among the public records requester, the public body
and the advocate.
(8) If the facilitated dispute resolution results in an agreement between the public
records requester and the state agency or city, the advocate shall prepare a written
document memorializing the agreement. The written agreement shall be executed by the
public records requester and an authorized representative of the state agency or city. The
written agreement shall control the resolution of the records request. [2017 c.728 §2]
192.465 [1975 c.308 §5; renumbered 192.418 in 2017]
192.468 Discretion of Public Records Advocate in dispute resolution
services. Consistent with ORS 192.464 and rules adopted thereunder, the Public
Records Advocate possesses sole discretion over the conduct of facilitated dispute
resolution sessions. [2017 c.728 §3]
192.470 [1973 c.794 §10; renumbered 192.422 in 2017]
192.472 Confidentiality of Public Records Advocate records. Written records,
documents, notes or statements of any kind prepared for or submitted to the Public
Records Advocate, prepared by the advocate or exchanged between parties seeking a

facilitated dispute resolution are subject to ORS 36.220 to 36.238. The Public Records
Advocate may claim any exemption from disclosure under ORS 192.311 to 192.478 that
a public body that is a party to the facilitated dispute resolution may claim with respect
to a request for public records described in this section. [2017 c.728 §4]
192.475 Public records request training. (1) The Public Records Advocate shall
provide training for state agencies and local governments on the requirements and best
practices for processing and responding to public records requests.
(2) The Public Records Advocate shall perform training sessions throughout this
state.
(3) Upon the written request of a state agency or local government, the Public
Records Advocate may provide guidance and advice on matters pertaining to public
records request processing and the disclosure and applicability of exemptions from
disclosure of public records.
(4) Guidance and advice provided pursuant to subsection (3) of this section is purely
advisory and must cease when the particular advice sought relates to a matter that is
referred to facilitated dispute resolution under ORS 192.464. [2017 c.728 §5]
192.476 Estimate of expenses; rules. (1) On or before January 1 preceding the start
of a biennium, the Public Records Advocate shall estimate the expenses the advocate
will incur for the upcoming biennium in carrying out the provisions of ORS 192.461 to
192.477. The advocate shall report the estimate to the Oregon Department of
Administrative Services and the Legislative Fiscal Officer.
(2) The advocate shall charge an assessment to each public body in state government
so as to recoup the costs estimated under subsection (1) of this section. Each public body
in state government shall pay to the credit of the advocate the amount the public body
was assessed under this subsection as an administrative expense from funds or
appropriations available to the public body in the same manner as other claims against
the public body are paid.
(3) The advocate shall adopt rules specifying the method for allocating the expenses
described in subsection (1) of this section among public bodies in state government and
for collecting the assessments described in this section.
(4) As used in this section, “state government” has the meaning given that term in
ORS 174.111. [2023 c.155 §1]
192.477 Public Records Advocate Fund. (1) The Public Records Advocate Fund is
established in the State Treasury, separate and distinct from the General Fund. Interest

earned by the Public Records Advocate Fund shall be credited to the Public Records
Advocate Fund.
(2) The Public Records Advocate Fund shall consist of:
(a) Moneys collected under ORS 192.476;
(b) Moneys appropriated or otherwise transferred to the fund by the Legislative
Assembly; and
(c) Interest earnings of the fund.
(3) Moneys in the Public Records Advocate Fund are continuously appropriated to
the Public Records Advocate for the purpose of funding the operations of the office of
the Public Records Advocate and the Public Records Advisory Council. [2021 c.582 §4;
2023 c.155 §2]

