PROVENANCE: Supplied by Kevin 2026-08-20 (exchange/'washington fees RCW 42.56.120_.pdf', text-extracted).
SOURCE: apps.leg.wa.gov official RCW page for 42.56.120 (Charges for copying), fetched 2026-08-20; history line ends 2017 c 304 s 3 (current codified text).
NOTE: Official current text; treat as openable-source equivalent for the WA gap pass.
----------------------------------------------------------------
8/20/26, 3:46 AM

RCW 42.56.120:

RCW 42.56.120
Charges for copying.
(1) No fee shall be charged for the inspection of public records or locating public documents and
making them available for copying, except as provided in RCW 42.56.240(14) and subsection (3) of this
section. A reasonable charge may be imposed for providing copies of public records and for the use by any
person of agency equipment or equipment of the office of the secretary of the senate or the office of the chief
clerk of the house of representatives to copy public records, which charges shall not exceed the amount
necessary to reimburse the agency, the office of the secretary of the senate, or the office of the chief clerk of
the house of representatives for its actual costs directly incident to such copying. When calculating any fees
authorized under this section, an agency shall use the most reasonable cost-efficient method available to the
agency as part of its normal operations. If any agency translates a record into an alternative electronic format
at the request of a requestor, the copy created does not constitute a new public record for purposes of this
chapter. Scanning paper records to make electronic copies of such records is a method of copying paper
records and does not amount to the creation of a new public record.
(2)(a) Agency charges for actual costs may only be imposed in accordance with the costs established
and published by the agency pursuant to RCW 42.56.070(7), and in accordance with the statement of factors
and manner used to determine the actual costs. In no event may an agency charge a per page cost greater
than the actual cost as established and published by the agency.
(b) An agency need not calculate the actual costs it charges for providing public records if it has rules
or regulations declaring the reasons doing so would be unduly burdensome. To the extent the agency has not
determined the actual costs of copying public records, the agency may not charge in excess of:
(i) Fifteen cents per page for photocopies of public records, printed copies of electronic public records
when requested by the person requesting records, or for the use of agency equipment to photocopy public
records;
(ii) Ten cents per page for public records scanned into an electronic format or for the use of agency
equipment to scan the records;
(iii) Five cents per each four electronic files or attachment uploaded to email, cloud-based data storage
service, or other means of electronic delivery; and
(iv) Ten cents per gigabyte for the transmission of public records in an electronic format or for the use
of agency equipment to send the records electronically. The agency shall take reasonable steps to provide the
records in the most efficient manner available to the agency in its normal operations; and
(v) The actual cost of any digital storage media or device provided by the agency, the actual cost of any
container or envelope used to mail the copies to the requestor, and the actual postage or delivery charge.
(c) The charges in (b) of this subsection may be combined to the extent that more than one type of
charge applies to copies produced in response to a particular request.

https://apps.leg.wa.gov/rcw/default.aspx?cite=42.56.120

1/3

8/20/26, 3:46 AM

RCW 42.56.120:

(d) An agency may charge a flat fee of up to two dollars for any request as an alternative to fees
authorized under (a) or (b) of this subsection when the agency reasonably estimates and documents that the
costs allowed under this subsection are clearly equal to or more than two dollars. An additional flat fee shall
not be charged for any installment after the first installment of a request produced in installments. An agency
that has elected to charge the flat fee in this subsection for an initial installment may not charge the fees
authorized under (a) or (b) of this subsection on subsequent installments.
(e) An agency shall not impose copying charges under this section for access to or downloading of
records that the agency routinely posts on its public internet website prior to receipt of a request unless the
requestor has specifically requested that the agency provide copies of such records through other means.
(f) A requestor may ask an agency to provide, and if requested an agency shall provide, a summary of
the applicable charges before any copies are made and the requestor may revise the request to reduce the
number of copies to be made and reduce the applicable charges.
(3)(a)(i) In addition to the charge imposed for providing copies of public records and for the use by any
person of agency equipment copying costs, an agency may include a customized service charge. A
customized service charge may only be imposed if the agency estimates that the request would require the
use of information technology expertise to prepare data compilations, or provide customized electronic access
services when such compilations and customized access services are not used by the agency for other
agency purposes.
(ii) The customized service charge may reimburse the agency up to the actual cost of providing the
services in this subsection.
(b) An agency may not assess a customized service charge unless the agency has notified the
requestor of the customized service charge to be applied to the request, including an explanation of why the
customized service charge applies, a description of the specific expertise, and a reasonable estimate cost of
the charge. The notice also must provide the requestor the opportunity to amend his or her request in order to
avoid or reduce the cost of a customized service charge.
(4) An agency may require a deposit in an amount not to exceed ten percent of the estimated cost of
providing copies for a request, including a customized service charge. If an agency makes a request available
on a partial or installment basis, the agency may charge for each part of the request as it is provided. If an
installment of a records request is not claimed or reviewed, the agency is not obligated to fulfill the balance of
the request. An agency may waive any charge assessed for a request pursuant to agency rules and
regulations. An agency may enter into any contract, memorandum of understanding, or other agreement with a
requestor that provides an alternative fee arrangement to the charges authorized in this section, or in
response to a voluminous or frequently occurring request.
[ 2017 c 304 s 3; 2016 c 163 s 4; 2005 c 483 s 2. Prior: 1995 c 397 s 14; 1995 c 341 s 2; 1973 c 1 s 30
(Initiative Measure No. 276, approved November 7, 1972). Formerly RCW 42.17.300.]

Notes:
Finding—Intent—2016 c 163: See note following RCW 42.56.240.
https://apps.leg.wa.gov/rcw/default.aspx?cite=42.56.120

2/3

8/20/26, 3:46 AM

RCW 42.56.120:

Effective date—1995 c 397: See note following RCW 29B.40.020.
Effective date—Construction—1973 c 1: See notes following RCW 29B.05.010.

https://apps.leg.wa.gov/rcw/default.aspx?cite=42.56.120

3/3

